.\" See section COPYING for copyright and redistribution information.
.TH EBROWSE 1
.SH NAME
ebrowse \- create a class hierarchy database
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ebrowse
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ FILES .\|.\|.]
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
This manual page documents briefly the
.BR ebrowse
command.  Full documentation is available in the GNU Info format.
.PP
.B ebrowse
is used to create the database used by the class browser in Emacs.
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
The program follows the usual GNU command line syntax, with long
options starting with two dashes (`-').
.TP
.B \-a, \-\-append
append output to existing file
.TP
.B \-f, \-\-files=FILES
read input file names from
.I FILE
.TP
.B \-I, \-\-search-path=LIST
set search path for input files
.TP
.B \-m, \-\-min-regexp-length=N
set minimum regexp length to
.I N
.TP
.B \-M, \-\-max-regexp-length=N
set maximum regexp length to
.I N
.TP
.B \-n, \-\-no-nested-classes
exclude nested classes
.TP
.B \-o, \-\-output-file=FILE
set output file name to
.I FILE
.TP
.B \-p, \-\-position-info
print info about position in file
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-no-structs-or-unions
don't record structs or unions
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-verbose
be verbose
.TP
.B \-V, \-\-very-verbose
be very verbose
.TP
.B \-x, \-\-no-regexps
don't record regular expressions
.TP
.B \-\-help
display this help
.TP
.B \-\-version
display version info
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR emacs (1),
.BR etags (1),
and the full documentation for
.B ebrowse
which is maintained as a Texinfo manual.  If the
.B info
and
.B ebrowse
programs are properly installed at your site, the command
.IP
.B info ebrowse
.PP
should give you access to the complete manual.
.SH AUTHOR
.I Ebrowse
was written by Gerd Moellmann.
.
.SH COPYING
Copyright
.if t \(co
.if n (C)
2008-2012 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
document provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
this document under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of
a permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
document into another language, under the above conditions for
modified versions, except that this permission notice may be stated
in a translation approved by the Free Software Foundation.
.
