.\" -*- nroff -*-
.\" See section COPYING for copyright and redistribution information.
.TH grep-changelog 1
.SH NAME
grep-changelog \- print ChangeLog entries matching criteria
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B grep-changelog
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ CHANGELOG .\|.\|.]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B grep-changelog
searches the named
.IR CHANGELOG s
(by default files matching the regular expressions
.B ChangeLog
and
.BR "ChangeLog\e.[0-9]+" )
for entries matching the specified criteria.  At least one option or
file must be specified.  This program is distributed with
.BR "GNU Emacs" .
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
The program accepts unambiguous abbreviations for option names.
.TP
.B \-\-author=AUTHOR
Print entries whose author matches regular expression
.IR AUTHOR .
.TP
.B \-\-text=TEXT
Print entries whose text matches regular expression
.IR TEXT .
.TP
.B \-\-exclude=TEXT
Exclude entries matching regular expression
.IR TEXT .
.TP
.B \-\-from\-date=YYYY\-MM\-DD
Only consider entries made on or after the given date.
ChangeLog date entries not in the
\*(lqYYYY\-MM\-DD\*(rq format are never matched.
.TP
.B \-\-to\-date=YYYY\-MM\-DD
Only consider entries made on or before the given date.
.TP
.B \-\-rcs\-log
Print output in a format suitable for RCS log entries.
This format removes author lines, leading spaces, and file names.
.TP
.B \-\-with\-date
In RCS log format, print short dates.
.TP
.B \-\-reverse
Show matches in reverse order.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Display version information.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Display basic usage information.
.
.SH COPYING
Copyright 
.if t \(co
.if n (C)
2008-2012 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.PP
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
document provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of
this document under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that
the entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of
a permission notice identical to this one.
.PP
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this
document into another language, under the above conditions for
modified versions, except that this permission notice may be stated
in a translation approved by the Free Software Foundation.
.
