This is ../../info/mh-e, produced by makeinfo version 4.13 from
mh-e.texi.

This is version 8.3 of `The MH-E Manual', last updated 2011-09-20.

   Copyright (C) 1995, 2001-2003, 2005-2012  Free Software Foundation,
Inc.

     Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
     document under the terms of either:

       a. the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later
          version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
          Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover texts being "A GNU
          Manual," and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below. A
          copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
          Free Documentation License."

          (a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: "You have the freedom to
          copy and modify this GNU manual. Buying copies from the FSF
          supports it in developing GNU and promoting software freedom."

       b. the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
          Software Foundation; either version 3, or (at your option)
          any later version. A copy of the license is included in the
          section entitled "GNU General Public License."


INFO-DIR-SECTION Emacs network features
START-INFO-DIR-ENTRY
* MH-E: (mh-e).                 Emacs interface to the MH mail system.
END-INFO-DIR-ENTRY


File: mh-e,  Node: GPL,  Next: Key Index,  Prev: GFDL,  Up: Top

Appendix F GNU General Public License
*************************************

                        Version 3, 29 June 2007

     Copyright (C) 2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc. `http://fsf.org/'

     Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies of this
     license document, but changing it is not allowed.

Preamble
========

The GNU General Public License is a free, copyleft license for software
and other kinds of works.

   The licenses for most software and other practical works are designed
to take away your freedom to share and change the works.  By contrast,
the GNU General Public License is intended to guarantee your freedom to
share and change all versions of a program--to make sure it remains
free software for all its users.  We, the Free Software Foundation, use
the GNU General Public License for most of our software; it applies
also to any other work released this way by its authors.  You can apply
it to your programs, too.

   When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not
price.  Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure that you
have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and charge for
them if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it if you
want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it in new
free programs, and that you know you can do these things.

   To protect your rights, we need to prevent others from denying you
these rights or asking you to surrender the rights.  Therefore, you
have certain responsibilities if you distribute copies of the software,
or if you modify it: responsibilities to respect the freedom of others.

   For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, whether
gratis or for a fee, you must pass on to the recipients the same
freedoms that you received.  You must make sure that they, too, receive
or can get the source code.  And you must show them these terms so they
know their rights.

   Developers that use the GNU GPL protect your rights with two steps:
(1) assert copyright on the software, and (2) offer you this License
giving you legal permission to copy, distribute and/or modify it.

   For the developers' and authors' protection, the GPL clearly explains
that there is no warranty for this free software.  For both users' and
authors' sake, the GPL requires that modified versions be marked as
changed, so that their problems will not be attributed erroneously to
authors of previous versions.

   Some devices are designed to deny users access to install or run
modified versions of the software inside them, although the
manufacturer can do so.  This is fundamentally incompatible with the
aim of protecting users' freedom to change the software.  The
systematic pattern of such abuse occurs in the area of products for
individuals to use, which is precisely where it is most unacceptable.
Therefore, we have designed this version of the GPL to prohibit the
practice for those products.  If such problems arise substantially in
other domains, we stand ready to extend this provision to those domains
in future versions of the GPL, as needed to protect the freedom of
users.

   Finally, every program is threatened constantly by software patents.
States should not allow patents to restrict development and use of
software on general-purpose computers, but in those that do, we wish to
avoid the special danger that patents applied to a free program could
make it effectively proprietary.  To prevent this, the GPL assures that
patents cannot be used to render the program non-free.

   The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution and
modification follow.

TERMS AND CONDITIONS
====================

  0. Definitions.

     "This License" refers to version 3 of the GNU General Public
     License.

     "Copyright" also means copyright-like laws that apply to other
     kinds of works, such as semiconductor masks.

     "The Program" refers to any copyrightable work licensed under this
     License.  Each licensee is addressed as "you".  "Licensees" and
     "recipients" may be individuals or organizations.

     To "modify" a work means to copy from or adapt all or part of the
     work in a fashion requiring copyright permission, other than the
     making of an exact copy.  The resulting work is called a "modified
     version" of the earlier work or a work "based on" the earlier work.

     A "covered work" means either the unmodified Program or a work
     based on the Program.

     To "propagate" a work means to do anything with it that, without
     permission, would make you directly or secondarily liable for
     infringement under applicable copyright law, except executing it
     on a computer or modifying a private copy.  Propagation includes
     copying, distribution (with or without modification), making
     available to the public, and in some countries other activities as
     well.

     To "convey" a work means any kind of propagation that enables other
     parties to make or receive copies.  Mere interaction with a user
     through a computer network, with no transfer of a copy, is not
     conveying.

     An interactive user interface displays "Appropriate Legal Notices"
     to the extent that it includes a convenient and prominently visible
     feature that (1) displays an appropriate copyright notice, and (2)
     tells the user that there is no warranty for the work (except to
     the extent that warranties are provided), that licensees may
     convey the work under this License, and how to view a copy of this
     License.  If the interface presents a list of user commands or
     options, such as a menu, a prominent item in the list meets this
     criterion.

  1. Source Code.

     The "source code" for a work means the preferred form of the work
     for making modifications to it.  "Object code" means any
     non-source form of a work.

     A "Standard Interface" means an interface that either is an
     official standard defined by a recognized standards body, or, in
     the case of interfaces specified for a particular programming
     language, one that is widely used among developers working in that
     language.

     The "System Libraries" of an executable work include anything,
     other than the work as a whole, that (a) is included in the normal
     form of packaging a Major Component, but which is not part of that
     Major Component, and (b) serves only to enable use of the work
     with that Major Component, or to implement a Standard Interface
     for which an implementation is available to the public in source
     code form.  A "Major Component", in this context, means a major
     essential component (kernel, window system, and so on) of the
     specific operating system (if any) on which the executable work
     runs, or a compiler used to produce the work, or an object code
     interpreter used to run it.

     The "Corresponding Source" for a work in object code form means all
     the source code needed to generate, install, and (for an executable
     work) run the object code and to modify the work, including
     scripts to control those activities.  However, it does not include
     the work's System Libraries, or general-purpose tools or generally
     available free programs which are used unmodified in performing
     those activities but which are not part of the work.  For example,
     Corresponding Source includes interface definition files
     associated with source files for the work, and the source code for
     shared libraries and dynamically linked subprograms that the work
     is specifically designed to require, such as by intimate data
     communication or control flow between those subprograms and other
     parts of the work.

     The Corresponding Source need not include anything that users can
     regenerate automatically from other parts of the Corresponding
     Source.

     The Corresponding Source for a work in source code form is that
     same work.

  2. Basic Permissions.

     All rights granted under this License are granted for the term of
     copyright on the Program, and are irrevocable provided the stated
     conditions are met.  This License explicitly affirms your unlimited
     permission to run the unmodified Program.  The output from running
     a covered work is covered by this License only if the output,
     given its content, constitutes a covered work.  This License
     acknowledges your rights of fair use or other equivalent, as
     provided by copyright law.

     You may make, run and propagate covered works that you do not
     convey, without conditions so long as your license otherwise
     remains in force.  You may convey covered works to others for the
     sole purpose of having them make modifications exclusively for
     you, or provide you with facilities for running those works,
     provided that you comply with the terms of this License in
     conveying all material for which you do not control copyright.
     Those thus making or running the covered works for you must do so
     exclusively on your behalf, under your direction and control, on
     terms that prohibit them from making any copies of your
     copyrighted material outside their relationship with you.

     Conveying under any other circumstances is permitted solely under
     the conditions stated below.  Sublicensing is not allowed; section
     10 makes it unnecessary.

  3. Protecting Users' Legal Rights From Anti-Circumvention Law.

     No covered work shall be deemed part of an effective technological
     measure under any applicable law fulfilling obligations under
     article 11 of the WIPO copyright treaty adopted on 20 December
     1996, or similar laws prohibiting or restricting circumvention of
     such measures.

     When you convey a covered work, you waive any legal power to forbid
     circumvention of technological measures to the extent such
     circumvention is effected by exercising rights under this License
     with respect to the covered work, and you disclaim any intention
     to limit operation or modification of the work as a means of
     enforcing, against the work's users, your or third parties' legal
     rights to forbid circumvention of technological measures.

  4. Conveying Verbatim Copies.

     You may convey verbatim copies of the Program's source code as you
     receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously and
     appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate copyright notice;
     keep intact all notices stating that this License and any
     non-permissive terms added in accord with section 7 apply to the
     code; keep intact all notices of the absence of any warranty; and
     give all recipients a copy of this License along with the Program.

     You may charge any price or no price for each copy that you convey,
     and you may offer support or warranty protection for a fee.

  5. Conveying Modified Source Versions.

     You may convey a work based on the Program, or the modifications to
     produce it from the Program, in the form of source code under the
     terms of section 4, provided that you also meet all of these
     conditions:

       a. The work must carry prominent notices stating that you
          modified it, and giving a relevant date.

       b. The work must carry prominent notices stating that it is
          released under this License and any conditions added under
          section 7.  This requirement modifies the requirement in
          section 4 to "keep intact all notices".

       c. You must license the entire work, as a whole, under this
          License to anyone who comes into possession of a copy.  This
          License will therefore apply, along with any applicable
          section 7 additional terms, to the whole of the work, and all
          its parts, regardless of how they are packaged.  This License
          gives no permission to license the work in any other way, but
          it does not invalidate such permission if you have separately
          received it.

       d. If the work has interactive user interfaces, each must display
          Appropriate Legal Notices; however, if the Program has
          interactive interfaces that do not display Appropriate Legal
          Notices, your work need not make them do so.

     A compilation of a covered work with other separate and independent
     works, which are not by their nature extensions of the covered
     work, and which are not combined with it such as to form a larger
     program, in or on a volume of a storage or distribution medium, is
     called an "aggregate" if the compilation and its resulting
     copyright are not used to limit the access or legal rights of the
     compilation's users beyond what the individual works permit.
     Inclusion of a covered work in an aggregate does not cause this
     License to apply to the other parts of the aggregate.

  6. Conveying Non-Source Forms.

     You may convey a covered work in object code form under the terms
     of sections 4 and 5, provided that you also convey the
     machine-readable Corresponding Source under the terms of this
     License, in one of these ways:

       a. Convey the object code in, or embodied in, a physical product
          (including a physical distribution medium), accompanied by the
          Corresponding Source fixed on a durable physical medium
          customarily used for software interchange.

       b. Convey the object code in, or embodied in, a physical product
          (including a physical distribution medium), accompanied by a
          written offer, valid for at least three years and valid for
          as long as you offer spare parts or customer support for that
          product model, to give anyone who possesses the object code
          either (1) a copy of the Corresponding Source for all the
          software in the product that is covered by this License, on a
          durable physical medium customarily used for software
          interchange, for a price no more than your reasonable cost of
          physically performing this conveying of source, or (2) access
          to copy the Corresponding Source from a network server at no
          charge.

       c. Convey individual copies of the object code with a copy of
          the written offer to provide the Corresponding Source.  This
          alternative is allowed only occasionally and noncommercially,
          and only if you received the object code with such an offer,
          in accord with subsection 6b.

       d. Convey the object code by offering access from a designated
          place (gratis or for a charge), and offer equivalent access
          to the Corresponding Source in the same way through the same
          place at no further charge.  You need not require recipients
          to copy the Corresponding Source along with the object code.
          If the place to copy the object code is a network server, the
          Corresponding Source may be on a different server (operated
          by you or a third party) that supports equivalent copying
          facilities, provided you maintain clear directions next to
          the object code saying where to find the Corresponding Source.
          Regardless of what server hosts the Corresponding Source, you
          remain obligated to ensure that it is available for as long
          as needed to satisfy these requirements.

       e. Convey the object code using peer-to-peer transmission,
          provided you inform other peers where the object code and
          Corresponding Source of the work are being offered to the
          general public at no charge under subsection 6d.


     A separable portion of the object code, whose source code is
     excluded from the Corresponding Source as a System Library, need
     not be included in conveying the object code work.

     A "User Product" is either (1) a "consumer product", which means
     any tangible personal property which is normally used for personal,
     family, or household purposes, or (2) anything designed or sold for
     incorporation into a dwelling.  In determining whether a product
     is a consumer product, doubtful cases shall be resolved in favor of
     coverage.  For a particular product received by a particular user,
     "normally used" refers to a typical or common use of that class of
     product, regardless of the status of the particular user or of the
     way in which the particular user actually uses, or expects or is
     expected to use, the product.  A product is a consumer product
     regardless of whether the product has substantial commercial,
     industrial or non-consumer uses, unless such uses represent the
     only significant mode of use of the product.

     "Installation Information" for a User Product means any methods,
     procedures, authorization keys, or other information required to
     install and execute modified versions of a covered work in that
     User Product from a modified version of its Corresponding Source.
     The information must suffice to ensure that the continued
     functioning of the modified object code is in no case prevented or
     interfered with solely because modification has been made.

     If you convey an object code work under this section in, or with,
     or specifically for use in, a User Product, and the conveying
     occurs as part of a transaction in which the right of possession
     and use of the User Product is transferred to the recipient in
     perpetuity or for a fixed term (regardless of how the transaction
     is characterized), the Corresponding Source conveyed under this
     section must be accompanied by the Installation Information.  But
     this requirement does not apply if neither you nor any third party
     retains the ability to install modified object code on the User
     Product (for example, the work has been installed in ROM).

     The requirement to provide Installation Information does not
     include a requirement to continue to provide support service,
     warranty, or updates for a work that has been modified or
     installed by the recipient, or for the User Product in which it
     has been modified or installed.  Access to a network may be denied
     when the modification itself materially and adversely affects the
     operation of the network or violates the rules and protocols for
     communication across the network.

     Corresponding Source conveyed, and Installation Information
     provided, in accord with this section must be in a format that is
     publicly documented (and with an implementation available to the
     public in source code form), and must require no special password
     or key for unpacking, reading or copying.

  7. Additional Terms.

     "Additional permissions" are terms that supplement the terms of
     this License by making exceptions from one or more of its
     conditions.  Additional permissions that are applicable to the
     entire Program shall be treated as though they were included in
     this License, to the extent that they are valid under applicable
     law.  If additional permissions apply only to part of the Program,
     that part may be used separately under those permissions, but the
     entire Program remains governed by this License without regard to
     the additional permissions.

     When you convey a copy of a covered work, you may at your option
     remove any additional permissions from that copy, or from any part
     of it.  (Additional permissions may be written to require their own
     removal in certain cases when you modify the work.)  You may place
     additional permissions on material, added by you to a covered work,
     for which you have or can give appropriate copyright permission.

     Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, for material
     you add to a covered work, you may (if authorized by the copyright
     holders of that material) supplement the terms of this License
     with terms:

       a. Disclaiming warranty or limiting liability differently from
          the terms of sections 15 and 16 of this License; or

       b. Requiring preservation of specified reasonable legal notices
          or author attributions in that material or in the Appropriate
          Legal Notices displayed by works containing it; or

       c. Prohibiting misrepresentation of the origin of that material,
          or requiring that modified versions of such material be
          marked in reasonable ways as different from the original
          version; or

       d. Limiting the use for publicity purposes of names of licensors
          or authors of the material; or

       e. Declining to grant rights under trademark law for use of some
          trade names, trademarks, or service marks; or

       f. Requiring indemnification of licensors and authors of that
          material by anyone who conveys the material (or modified
          versions of it) with contractual assumptions of liability to
          the recipient, for any liability that these contractual
          assumptions directly impose on those licensors and authors.

     All other non-permissive additional terms are considered "further
     restrictions" within the meaning of section 10.  If the Program as
     you received it, or any part of it, contains a notice stating that
     it is governed by this License along with a term that is a further
     restriction, you may remove that term.  If a license document
     contains a further restriction but permits relicensing or
     conveying under this License, you may add to a covered work
     material governed by the terms of that license document, provided
     that the further restriction does not survive such relicensing or
     conveying.

     If you add terms to a covered work in accord with this section, you
     must place, in the relevant source files, a statement of the
     additional terms that apply to those files, or a notice indicating
     where to find the applicable terms.

     Additional terms, permissive or non-permissive, may be stated in
     the form of a separately written license, or stated as exceptions;
     the above requirements apply either way.

  8. Termination.

     You may not propagate or modify a covered work except as expressly
     provided under this License.  Any attempt otherwise to propagate or
     modify it is void, and will automatically terminate your rights
     under this License (including any patent licenses granted under
     the third paragraph of section 11).

     However, if you cease all violation of this License, then your
     license from a particular copyright holder is reinstated (a)
     provisionally, unless and until the copyright holder explicitly
     and finally terminates your license, and (b) permanently, if the
     copyright holder fails to notify you of the violation by some
     reasonable means prior to 60 days after the cessation.

     Moreover, your license from a particular copyright holder is
     reinstated permanently if the copyright holder notifies you of the
     violation by some reasonable means, this is the first time you have
     received notice of violation of this License (for any work) from
     that copyright holder, and you cure the violation prior to 30 days
     after your receipt of the notice.

     Termination of your rights under this section does not terminate
     the licenses of parties who have received copies or rights from
     you under this License.  If your rights have been terminated and
     not permanently reinstated, you do not qualify to receive new
     licenses for the same material under section 10.

  9. Acceptance Not Required for Having Copies.

     You are not required to accept this License in order to receive or
     run a copy of the Program.  Ancillary propagation of a covered work
     occurring solely as a consequence of using peer-to-peer
     transmission to receive a copy likewise does not require
     acceptance.  However, nothing other than this License grants you
     permission to propagate or modify any covered work.  These actions
     infringe copyright if you do not accept this License.  Therefore,
     by modifying or propagating a covered work, you indicate your
     acceptance of this License to do so.

 10. Automatic Licensing of Downstream Recipients.

     Each time you convey a covered work, the recipient automatically
     receives a license from the original licensors, to run, modify and
     propagate that work, subject to this License.  You are not
     responsible for enforcing compliance by third parties with this
     License.

     An "entity transaction" is a transaction transferring control of an
     organization, or substantially all assets of one, or subdividing an
     organization, or merging organizations.  If propagation of a
     covered work results from an entity transaction, each party to that
     transaction who receives a copy of the work also receives whatever
     licenses to the work the party's predecessor in interest had or
     could give under the previous paragraph, plus a right to
     possession of the Corresponding Source of the work from the
     predecessor in interest, if the predecessor has it or can get it
     with reasonable efforts.

     You may not impose any further restrictions on the exercise of the
     rights granted or affirmed under this License.  For example, you
     may not impose a license fee, royalty, or other charge for
     exercise of rights granted under this License, and you may not
     initiate litigation (including a cross-claim or counterclaim in a
     lawsuit) alleging that any patent claim is infringed by making,
     using, selling, offering for sale, or importing the Program or any
     portion of it.

 11. Patents.

     A "contributor" is a copyright holder who authorizes use under this
     License of the Program or a work on which the Program is based.
     The work thus licensed is called the contributor's "contributor
     version".

     A contributor's "essential patent claims" are all patent claims
     owned or controlled by the contributor, whether already acquired or
     hereafter acquired, that would be infringed by some manner,
     permitted by this License, of making, using, or selling its
     contributor version, but do not include claims that would be
     infringed only as a consequence of further modification of the
     contributor version.  For purposes of this definition, "control"
     includes the right to grant patent sublicenses in a manner
     consistent with the requirements of this License.

     Each contributor grants you a non-exclusive, worldwide,
     royalty-free patent license under the contributor's essential
     patent claims, to make, use, sell, offer for sale, import and
     otherwise run, modify and propagate the contents of its
     contributor version.

     In the following three paragraphs, a "patent license" is any
     express agreement or commitment, however denominated, not to
     enforce a patent (such as an express permission to practice a
     patent or covenant not to sue for patent infringement).  To
     "grant" such a patent license to a party means to make such an
     agreement or commitment not to enforce a patent against the party.

     If you convey a covered work, knowingly relying on a patent
     license, and the Corresponding Source of the work is not available
     for anyone to copy, free of charge and under the terms of this
     License, through a publicly available network server or other
     readily accessible means, then you must either (1) cause the
     Corresponding Source to be so available, or (2) arrange to deprive
     yourself of the benefit of the patent license for this particular
     work, or (3) arrange, in a manner consistent with the requirements
     of this License, to extend the patent license to downstream
     recipients.  "Knowingly relying" means you have actual knowledge
     that, but for the patent license, your conveying the covered work
     in a country, or your recipient's use of the covered work in a
     country, would infringe one or more identifiable patents in that
     country that you have reason to believe are valid.

     If, pursuant to or in connection with a single transaction or
     arrangement, you convey, or propagate by procuring conveyance of, a
     covered work, and grant a patent license to some of the parties
     receiving the covered work authorizing them to use, propagate,
     modify or convey a specific copy of the covered work, then the
     patent license you grant is automatically extended to all
     recipients of the covered work and works based on it.

     A patent license is "discriminatory" if it does not include within
     the scope of its coverage, prohibits the exercise of, or is
     conditioned on the non-exercise of one or more of the rights that
     are specifically granted under this License.  You may not convey a
     covered work if you are a party to an arrangement with a third
     party that is in the business of distributing software, under
     which you make payment to the third party based on the extent of
     your activity of conveying the work, and under which the third
     party grants, to any of the parties who would receive the covered
     work from you, a discriminatory patent license (a) in connection
     with copies of the covered work conveyed by you (or copies made
     from those copies), or (b) primarily for and in connection with
     specific products or compilations that contain the covered work,
     unless you entered into that arrangement, or that patent license
     was granted, prior to 28 March 2007.

     Nothing in this License shall be construed as excluding or limiting
     any implied license or other defenses to infringement that may
     otherwise be available to you under applicable patent law.

 12. No Surrender of Others' Freedom.

     If conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order,
     agreement or otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this
     License, they do not excuse you from the conditions of this
     License.  If you cannot convey a covered work so as to satisfy
     simultaneously your obligations under this License and any other
     pertinent obligations, then as a consequence you may not convey it
     at all.  For example, if you agree to terms that obligate you to
     collect a royalty for further conveying from those to whom you
     convey the Program, the only way you could satisfy both those
     terms and this License would be to refrain entirely from conveying
     the Program.

 13. Use with the GNU Affero General Public License.

     Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, you have
     permission to link or combine any covered work with a work licensed
     under version 3 of the GNU Affero General Public License into a
     single combined work, and to convey the resulting work.  The terms
     of this License will continue to apply to the part which is the
     covered work, but the special requirements of the GNU Affero
     General Public License, section 13, concerning interaction through
     a network will apply to the combination as such.

 14. Revised Versions of this License.

     The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new
     versions of the GNU General Public License from time to time.
     Such new versions will be similar in spirit to the present
     version, but may differ in detail to address new problems or
     concerns.

     Each version is given a distinguishing version number.  If the
     Program specifies that a certain numbered version of the GNU
     General Public License "or any later version" applies to it, you
     have the option of following the terms and conditions either of
     that numbered version or of any later version published by the
     Free Software Foundation.  If the Program does not specify a
     version number of the GNU General Public License, you may choose
     any version ever published by the Free Software Foundation.

     If the Program specifies that a proxy can decide which future
     versions of the GNU General Public License can be used, that
     proxy's public statement of acceptance of a version permanently
     authorizes you to choose that version for the Program.

     Later license versions may give you additional or different
     permissions.  However, no additional obligations are imposed on any
     author or copyright holder as a result of your choosing to follow a
     later version.

 15. Disclaimer of Warranty.

     THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY
     APPLICABLE LAW.  EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE
     COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM "AS IS"
     WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED,
     INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
     MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  THE ENTIRE
     RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE PROGRAM IS WITH YOU.
     SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL
     NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.

 16. Limitation of Liability.

     IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO IN
     WRITING WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MODIFIES
     AND/OR CONVEYS THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU
     FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR
     CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR INABILITY TO USE
     THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA
     BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY YOU OR THIRD
     PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER
     PROGRAMS), EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF
     THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

 17. Interpretation of Sections 15 and 16.

     If the disclaimer of warranty and limitation of liability provided
     above cannot be given local legal effect according to their terms,
     reviewing courts shall apply local law that most closely
     approximates an absolute waiver of all civil liability in
     connection with the Program, unless a warranty or assumption of
     liability accompanies a copy of the Program in return for a fee.


END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS
===========================

How to Apply These Terms to Your New Programs
=============================================

If you develop a new program, and you want it to be of the greatest
possible use to the public, the best way to achieve this is to make it
free software which everyone can redistribute and change under these
terms.

   To do so, attach the following notices to the program.  It is safest
to attach them to the start of each source file to most effectively
state the exclusion of warranty; and each file should have at least the
"copyright" line and a pointer to where the full notice is found.

     ONE LINE TO GIVE THE PROGRAM'S NAME AND A BRIEF IDEA OF WHAT IT DOES.
     Copyright (C) YEAR NAME OF AUTHOR

     This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
     it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
     the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at
     your option) any later version.

     This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
     WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
     MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
     General Public License for more details.

     You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
     along with this program.  If not, see `http://www.gnu.org/licenses/'.

   Also add information on how to contact you by electronic and paper
mail.

   If the program does terminal interaction, make it output a short
notice like this when it starts in an interactive mode:

     PROGRAM Copyright (C) YEAR NAME OF AUTHOR
     This program comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY; for details type `show w'.
     This is free software, and you are welcome to redistribute it
     under certain conditions; type `show c' for details.

   The hypothetical commands `show w' and `show c' should show the
appropriate parts of the General Public License.  Of course, your
program's commands might be different; for a GUI interface, you would
use an "about box".

   You should also get your employer (if you work as a programmer) or
school, if any, to sign a "copyright disclaimer" for the program, if
necessary.  For more information on this, and how to apply and follow
the GNU GPL, see `http://www.gnu.org/licenses/'.

   The GNU General Public License does not permit incorporating your
program into proprietary programs.  If your program is a subroutine
library, you may consider it more useful to permit linking proprietary
applications with the library.  If this is what you want to do, use the
GNU Lesser General Public License instead of this License.  But first,
please read `http://www.gnu.org/philosophy/why-not-lgpl.html'.


File: mh-e,  Node: Key Index,  Next: Command Index,  Prev: GPL,  Up: Top

Key (Character) Index
*********************

 [index ]
* Menu:

* ! <1>:                                 Folders.             (line  11)
* !:                                     Files and Pipes.     (line   6)
* ':                                     Sequences.           (line  13)
* , (comma) <1>:                         Editing Message.     (line  32)
* , (comma) <2>:                         Editing Drafts.      (line  16)
* , (comma) <3>:                         Viewing.             (line   6)
* , (comma):                             Reading Mail.        (line  27)
* . (period):                            Viewing.             (line   6)
* / ':                                   Limits.              (line  13)
* / ?:                                   Limits.              (line  11)
* / c:                                   Limits.              (line  16)
* / g:                                   Limits.              (line  23)
* / m:                                   Limits.              (line  19)
* / s:                                   Limits.              (line  26)
* / t:                                   Limits.              (line  30)
* / w:                                   Limits.              (line  33)
* : (colon) <1>:                         Viewing Attachments. (line 125)
* : (colon):                             Reading Mail.        (line  30)
* ; (semicolon) <1>:                     Viewing Attachments. (line  11)
* ; (semicolon):                         Reading Mail.        (line  34)
* <BS> <1>:                              Digests.             (line   6)
* <BS> <2>:                              Viewing.             (line   6)
* <BS> <3>:                              Reading Mail.        (line  41)
* <BS>:                                  Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  42)
* <DEL>:                                 Reading Mail Tour.   (line  41)
* <RET> <1>:                             Navigating.          (line  18)
* <RET> <2>:                             Files and Pipes.     (line  31)
* <RET> <3>:                             Viewing Attachments. (line  25)
* <RET> <4>:                             Viewing.             (line   6)
* <RET> <5>:                             Reading Mail.        (line  24)
* <RET> <6>:                             Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line   6)
* <RET>:                                 Reading Mail Tour.   (line  20)
* <SPC> <1>:                             Aliases.             (line  13)
* <SPC> <2>:                             Editing Message.     (line  32)
* <SPC> <3>:                             Editing Drafts.      (line  11)
* <SPC> <4>:                             Digests.             (line   6)
* <SPC> <5>:                             Viewing.             (line   6)
* <SPC> <6>:                             Reading Mail.        (line  38)
* <SPC> <7>:                             Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  51)
* <SPC>:                                 Reading Mail Tour.   (line  41)
* <TAB> <1>:                             Searching.           (line  67)
* <TAB> <2>:                             Aliases.             (line  74)
* <TAB> <3>:                             Editing Message.     (line  19)
* <TAB> <4>:                             Editing Drafts.      (line  19)
* <TAB>:                                 Folders.             (line 325)
* > <1>:                                 Files and Pipes.     (line   6)
* >:                                     Reading Mail.        (line  44)
* ? <1>:                                 Miscellaneous.       (line  29)
* ? <2>:                                 Folders.             (line  10)
* ? <3>:                                 Reading Mail.        (line  23)
* ? <4>:                                 Using This Manual.   (line   9)
* ?:                                     Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  75)
* c:                                     Folders.             (line  14)
* C-<SPC>:                               Conventions.         (line  90)
* C-@:                                   Conventions.         (line  90)
* C-b:                                   Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  42)
* C-c <RET>:                             Viewing.             (line 113)
* C-c ? <1>:                             Miscellaneous.       (line  29)
* C-c ? <2>:                             Searching.           (line  12)
* C-c ? <3>:                             Editing Drafts.      (line  26)
* C-c ? <4>:                             Using This Manual.   (line   9)
* C-c ?:                                 Sending Mail Tour.   (line  44)
* C-c C-c <1>:                           Searching.           (line  13)
* C-c C-c <2>:                           Sending Message.     (line   6)
* C-c C-c <3>:                           Editing Drafts.      (line  29)
* C-c C-c <4>:                           Editing Again.       (line  17)
* C-c C-c <5>:                           Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  42)
* C-c C-c:                               Sending Mail Tour.   (line  44)
* C-c C-d <1>:                           Identities.          (line  13)
* C-c C-d:                               Editing Drafts.      (line  32)
* C-c C-e <1>:                           Adding Attachments.  (line 201)
* C-c C-e:                               Editing Drafts.      (line  36)
* C-c C-f a <1>:                         Searching.           (line  22)
* C-c C-f a:                             Editing Drafts.      (line  39)
* C-c C-f b <1>:                         Searching.           (line  26)
* C-c C-f b:                             Editing Drafts.      (line  43)
* C-c C-f c <1>:                         Searching.           (line  30)
* C-c C-f c:                             Editing Drafts.      (line  47)
* C-c C-f C-a <1>:                       Searching.           (line  22)
* C-c C-f C-a:                           Editing Drafts.      (line  39)
* C-c C-f C-b <1>:                       Searching.           (line  26)
* C-c C-f C-b:                           Editing Drafts.      (line  43)
* C-c C-f C-c <1>:                       Searching.           (line  30)
* C-c C-f C-c:                           Editing Drafts.      (line  47)
* C-c C-f C-d <1>:                       Searching.           (line  34)
* C-c C-f C-d:                           Editing Drafts.      (line  51)
* C-c C-f C-f <1>:                       Searching.           (line  38)
* C-c C-f C-f <2>:                       Editing Message.     (line  14)
* C-c C-f C-f:                           Editing Drafts.      (line  55)
* C-c C-f C-l <1>:                       Searching.           (line  42)
* C-c C-f C-l:                           Editing Drafts.      (line  59)
* C-c C-f C-m <1>:                       Searching.           (line  46)
* C-c C-f C-m:                           Editing Drafts.      (line  63)
* C-c C-f C-r <1>:                       Searching.           (line  50)
* C-c C-f C-r:                           Editing Drafts.      (line  67)
* C-c C-f C-s <1>:                       Searching.           (line  54)
* C-c C-f C-s:                           Editing Drafts.      (line  71)
* C-c C-f C-t <1>:                       Searching.           (line  58)
* C-c C-f C-t <2>:                       Editing Message.     (line   6)
* C-c C-f C-t <3>:                       Editing Drafts.      (line  75)
* C-c C-f C-t:                           Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  42)
* C-c C-f d <1>:                         Searching.           (line  34)
* C-c C-f d:                             Editing Drafts.      (line  51)
* C-c C-f f <1>:                         Searching.           (line  38)
* C-c C-f f <2>:                         Editing Message.     (line  14)
* C-c C-f f:                             Editing Drafts.      (line  55)
* C-c C-f l <1>:                         Searching.           (line  42)
* C-c C-f l:                             Editing Drafts.      (line  59)
* C-c C-f m <1>:                         Searching.           (line  46)
* C-c C-f m:                             Editing Drafts.      (line  63)
* C-c C-f r <1>:                         Searching.           (line  50)
* C-c C-f r:                             Editing Drafts.      (line  67)
* C-c C-f s <1>:                         Searching.           (line  54)
* C-c C-f s:                             Editing Drafts.      (line  71)
* C-c C-f t <1>:                         Searching.           (line  58)
* C-c C-f t <2>:                         Editing Message.     (line   6)
* C-c C-f t:                             Editing Drafts.      (line  75)
* C-c C-i <1>:                           Inserting Messages.  (line   6)
* C-c C-i:                               Editing Drafts.      (line  79)
* C-c C-m:                               Adding Attachments.  (line  12)
* C-c C-m C-e <1>:                       Sending PGP.         (line  11)
* C-c C-m C-e:                           Editing Drafts.      (line  82)
* C-c C-m C-f <1>:                       Adding Attachments.  (line 109)
* C-c C-m C-f:                           Editing Drafts.      (line  85)
* C-c C-m C-g <1>:                       Adding Attachments.  (line 118)
* C-c C-m C-g:                           Editing Drafts.      (line  89)
* C-c C-m C-i <1>:                       Adding Attachments.  (line  99)
* C-c C-m C-i:                           Editing Drafts.      (line  94)
* C-c C-m C-m <1>:                       Adding Attachments.  (line 168)
* C-c C-m C-m:                           Editing Drafts.      (line  99)
* C-c C-m C-n <1>:                       Sending PGP.         (line  27)
* C-c C-m C-n:                           Editing Drafts.      (line 103)
* C-c C-m C-s <1>:                       Sending PGP.         (line  11)
* C-c C-m C-s:                           Editing Drafts.      (line 107)
* C-c C-m C-t <1>:                       Adding Attachments.  (line 126)
* C-c C-m C-t:                           Editing Drafts.      (line 110)
* C-c C-m C-u <1>:                       Adding Attachments.  (line 201)
* C-c C-m C-u:                           Editing Drafts.      (line 115)
* C-c C-m C-x <1>:                       Adding Attachments.  (line 136)
* C-c C-m C-x:                           Editing Drafts.      (line 119)
* C-c C-m e e <1>:                       Sending PGP.         (line  11)
* C-c C-m e e:                           Editing Drafts.      (line 123)
* C-c C-m e s <1>:                       Sending PGP.         (line  11)
* C-c C-m e s:                           Editing Drafts.      (line 126)
* C-c C-m f <1>:                         Adding Attachments.  (line 109)
* C-c C-m f:                             Editing Drafts.      (line  85)
* C-c C-m g <1>:                         Adding Attachments.  (line 118)
* C-c C-m g:                             Editing Drafts.      (line  89)
* C-c C-m i <1>:                         Adding Attachments.  (line  99)
* C-c C-m i:                             Editing Drafts.      (line  94)
* C-c C-m m <1>:                         Adding Attachments.  (line 168)
* C-c C-m m:                             Editing Drafts.      (line  99)
* C-c C-m n <1>:                         Sending PGP.         (line  27)
* C-c C-m n:                             Editing Drafts.      (line 103)
* C-c C-m s e <1>:                       Sending PGP.         (line  11)
* C-c C-m s e:                           Editing Drafts.      (line 130)
* C-c C-m s s <1>:                       Sending PGP.         (line  11)
* C-c C-m s s:                           Editing Drafts.      (line 134)
* C-c C-m t <1>:                         Adding Attachments.  (line 126)
* C-c C-m t:                             Editing Drafts.      (line 110)
* C-c C-m u <1>:                         Adding Attachments.  (line 201)
* C-c C-m u:                             Editing Drafts.      (line 115)
* C-c C-m x <1>:                         Adding Attachments.  (line 136)
* C-c C-m x:                             Editing Drafts.      (line 119)
* C-c C-o <1>:                           Editing Message.     (line  80)
* C-c C-o:                               Editing Drafts.      (line 137)
* C-c C-p:                               Searching.           (line  16)
* C-c C-q <1>:                           Killing Draft.       (line   6)
* C-c C-q:                               Editing Drafts.      (line 140)
* C-c C-s <1>:                           Signature.           (line   6)
* C-c C-s:                               Editing Drafts.      (line 143)
* C-c C-t <1>:                           Editing Message.     (line  47)
* C-c C-t:                               Editing Drafts.      (line 146)
* C-c C-w <1>:                           Miscellaneous.       (line  44)
* C-c C-w <2>:                           Checking Recipients. (line   6)
* C-c C-w:                               Editing Drafts.      (line 150)
* C-c C-y <1>:                           Inserting Letter.    (line   6)
* C-c C-y:                               Editing Drafts.      (line 154)
* C-c M-d <1>:                           Identities.          (line  14)
* C-c M-d:                               Editing Drafts.      (line 158)
* C-d <1>:                               Navigating.          (line  33)
* C-d:                                   Reading Mail.        (line  50)
* C-f:                                   Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  42)
* C-h C-h:                               Using This Manual.   (line   9)
* C-h C-k i:                             Using This Manual.   (line   9)
* C-h i <1>:                             Using This Manual.   (line   9)
* C-h i:                                 Preface.             (line  29)
* C-h m <1>:                             Using This Manual.   (line   9)
* C-h m <2>:                             Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  75)
* C-h m:                                 Sending Mail Tour.   (line  44)
* C-h t <1>:                             Conventions.         (line 106)
* C-h t:                                 Preface.             (line  19)
* C-n <1>:                               Navigating.          (line  18)
* C-n:                                   Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  42)
* C-o:                                   Editing Message.     (line  80)
* C-p <1>:                               Navigating.          (line  18)
* C-p:                                   Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  42)
* C-u:                                   Conventions.         (line  45)
* C-u, with ranges:                      Ranges.              (line  10)
* C-x 5 0:                               Speedbar.            (line  37)
* C-x b:                                 Leaving MH-E.        (line  12)
* C-x C-c:                               Leaving MH-E.        (line   6)
* C-x k <1>:                             Killing Draft.       (line   6)
* C-x k:                                 Leaving MH-E.        (line  12)
* d <1>:                                 Sequences.           (line 105)
* d <2>:                                 Navigating.          (line  23)
* d <3>:                                 Digests.             (line  13)
* d <4>:                                 Reading Mail.        (line  54)
* d:                                     Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  63)
* D <BS> <1>:                            Digests.             (line   6)
* D <BS>:                                Reading Mail.        (line  64)
* D <SPC> <1>:                           Digests.             (line   6)
* D <SPC>:                               Reading Mail.        (line  61)
* D ?:                                   Reading Mail.        (line  57)
* D b <1>:                               Digests.             (line  13)
* D b:                                   Reading Mail.        (line  67)
* E:                                     Editing Again.       (line  17)
* e <1>:                                 Editing Again.       (line   6)
* e:                                     Redistributing.      (line  12)
* E:                                     Sending Mail.        (line  20)
* e:                                     Sending Mail.        (line  19)
* f <1>:                                 Forwarding.          (line   6)
* f:                                     Sending Mail.        (line  24)
* F ' <1>:                               Sequences.           (line  73)
* F ':                                   Folders.             (line  21)
* F ? <1>:                               Folders.             (line  17)
* F ?:                                   Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  75)
* F c:                                   Folders.             (line  24)
* F k <1>:                               Searching.           (line 185)
* F k:                                   Folders.             (line  27)
* F l <1>:                               Miscellaneous.       (line  25)
* F l:                                   Folders.             (line  30)
* F n:                                   Folders.             (line  33)
* F p:                                   Folders.             (line  36)
* F q:                                   Folders.             (line  39)
* F r <1>:                               Searching.           (line 176)
* F r <2>:                               Folders.             (line  42)
* F r <3>:                               Reading Mail.        (line   6)
* F r:                                   Reading Mail Tour.   (line  12)
* F s:                                   Searching.           (line   6)
* F S:                                   Folders.             (line 309)
* F s:                                   Folders.             (line 280)
* F S:                                   Folders.             (line  48)
* F s:                                   Folders.             (line  45)
* F u:                                   Folders.             (line  51)
* F v <1>:                               Speedbar.            (line   6)
* F v <2>:                               Folders.             (line  55)
* F v:                                   Reading Mail.        (line   6)
* F v drafts:                            Editing Again.       (line   6)
* g <1>:                                 Navigating.          (line   6)
* g:                                     Reading Mail.        (line  70)
* i <1>:                                 Incorporating Mail.  (line  10)
* i:                                     Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  63)
* I *:                                   Incorporating Mail.  (line  67)
* J ?:                                   Junk.                (line  17)
* J b:                                   Junk.                (line  19)
* J w:                                   Junk.                (line  22)
* k <1>:                                 Threading.           (line  60)
* k <2>:                                 Folders.             (line 330)
* k <3>:                                 Navigating.          (line  37)
* k:                                     Reading Mail.        (line  73)
* K <TAB> <1>:                           Viewing Attachments. (line  25)
* K <TAB>:                               Reading Mail.        (line  81)
* K ?:                                   Reading Mail.        (line  77)
* K a <1>:                               Viewing Attachments. (line  72)
* K a:                                   Reading Mail.        (line  87)
* K e <1>:                               Viewing Attachments. (line  48)
* K e:                                   Reading Mail.        (line  90)
* K i <1>:                               Viewing Attachments. (line 131)
* K i:                                   Reading Mail.        (line  93)
* K o <1>:                               Viewing Attachments. (line  63)
* K o:                                   Reading Mail.        (line  96)
* K S-<TAB> <1>:                         Viewing Attachments. (line  25)
* K S-<TAB>:                             Reading Mail.        (line  84)
* K t <1>:                               Viewing Attachments. (line  88)
* K t:                                   Reading Mail.        (line  99)
* K v <1>:                               Viewing Attachments. (line  37)
* K v:                                   Reading Mail.        (line 103)
* l:                                     Files and Pipes.     (line  14)
* m:                                     Composing.           (line  16)
* M <1>:                                 Miscellaneous Commands and Options.
                                                              (line   8)
* M:                                     Reading Mail.        (line 106)
* m:                                     Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  72)
* M-< <1>:                               Navigating.          (line   6)
* M-<:                                   Reading Mail.        (line 109)
* M-<TAB> <1>:                           Aliases.             (line  14)
* M-<TAB> <2>:                           Editing Message.     (line  32)
* M-<TAB>:                               Editing Drafts.      (line  12)
* M-> <1>:                               Navigating.          (line   6)
* M->:                                   Reading Mail.        (line 112)
* M-d <1>:                               Redistributing.      (line   6)
* M-d:                                   Sending Mail.        (line  33)
* M-n <1>:                               Navigating.          (line   6)
* M-n:                                   Reading Mail.        (line 115)
* M-p <1>:                               Navigating.          (line   6)
* M-p:                                   Reading Mail.        (line 118)
* M-q:                                   Editing Message.     (line  62)
* M-x:                                   Conventions.         (line 106)
* M-x mh-alias-add-address-under-point:  Aliases.             (line 203)
* M-x mh-alias-add-alias:                Aliases.             (line 175)
* M-x mh-alias-apropos:                  Aliases.             (line 225)
* M-x mh-alias-grab-from-field:          Aliases.             (line 203)
* M-x mh-alias-reload:                   Aliases.             (line 162)
* M-x mh-rmail <1>:                      Reading Mail.        (line   6)
* M-x mh-rmail <2>:                      Leaving MH-E.        (line  12)
* M-x mh-rmail:                          Reading Mail Tour.   (line   6)
* M-x mh-smail <1>:                      Composing.           (line   6)
* M-x mh-smail <2>:                      Sending Mail.        (line   6)
* M-x mh-smail <3>:                      Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  72)
* M-x mh-smail:                          Sending Mail Tour.   (line   6)
* M-x mh-smail-other-window:             Composing.           (line   6)
* M-x mh-update-sequences:               Sequences.           (line 112)
* M-x mh-version <1>:                    Getting MH-E.        (line  24)
* M-x mh-version <2>:                    Bug Reports.         (line   6)
* M-x mh-version:                        Miscellaneous.       (line  12)
* M-x speedbar:                          Speedbar.            (line   6)
* Mouse-1 <1>:                           Viewing Attachments. (line  25)
* Mouse-1:                               Reading Mail.        (line 163)
* Mouse-2 <1>:                           Speedbar.            (line   6)
* Mouse-2 <2>:                           HTML.                (line  30)
* Mouse-2 <3>:                           Viewing Attachments. (line  25)
* Mouse-2 <4>:                           Viewing.             (line   6)
* Mouse-2:                               Reading Mail.        (line 156)
* Mouse-3:                               Speedbar.            (line  37)
* n <1>:                                 Editing Again.       (line   6)
* n <2>:                                 Navigating.          (line   6)
* n <3>:                                 Reading Mail.        (line 121)
* n <4>:                                 Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  63)
* n:                                     Reading Mail Tour.   (line  20)
* o <1>:                                 Folders.             (line  58)
* o:                                     Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  51)
* p <1>:                                 Navigating.          (line   6)
* p <2>:                                 Reading Mail.        (line 124)
* p <3>:                                 Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  63)
* p:                                     Reading Mail Tour.   (line  20)
* P ?:                                   Reading Mail.        (line 127)
* P C <1>:                               Printing.            (line  18)
* P C:                                   Reading Mail.        (line 131)
* P f:                                   Printing.            (line  40)
* P F:                                   Printing.            (line  26)
* P f <1>:                               Printing.            (line   6)
* P f:                                   Reading Mail.        (line 139)
* P F:                                   Reading Mail.        (line 135)
* P l <1>:                               Printing.            (line  35)
* P l:                                   Reading Mail.        (line 142)
* P p <1>:                               Printing.            (line   6)
* P p:                                   Reading Mail.        (line 145)
* q <1>:                                 Sequences.           (line 112)
* q <2>:                                 Folders.             (line  61)
* q:                                     Leaving MH-E.        (line  12)
* r <1>:                                 Inserting Letter.    (line  36)
* r <2>:                                 Replying.            (line   6)
* r <3>:                                 Sending Mail.        (line  27)
* r:                                     Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line   6)
* s:                                     Sending Mail.        (line  30)
* S ':                                   Sequences.           (line  18)
* S ?:                                   Sequences.           (line  14)
* S d:                                   Sequences.           (line  21)
* S k:                                   Sequences.           (line  24)
* S l:                                   Sequences.           (line  27)
* S n:                                   Sequences.           (line  30)
* S p:                                   Sequences.           (line  33)
* S s:                                   Sequences.           (line  36)
* S w:                                   Sequences.           (line  40)
* S-<TAB> <1>:                           Searching.           (line  68)
* S-<TAB> <2>:                           Editing Message.     (line  19)
* S-<TAB>:                               Editing Drafts.      (line  22)
* S-Mouse-2:                             HTML.                (line  93)
* SPC:                                   Conventions.         (line  98)
* t <1>:                                 Folders.             (line  64)
* t:                                     Digests.             (line  13)
* T ?:                                   Threading.           (line  19)
* T d <1>:                               Threading.           (line  24)
* T d:                                   Navigating.          (line  37)
* T n:                                   Threading.           (line  30)
* T o:                                   Threading.           (line  21)
* T p:                                   Threading.           (line  33)
* T t:                                   Threading.           (line  27)
* T u:                                   Threading.           (line  36)
* TAB:                                   Conventions.         (line  98)
* u <1>:                                 Folders.             (line  68)
* u:                                     Navigating.          (line  37)
* v:                                     Searching.           (line  71)
* x <1>:                                 Sequences.           (line 112)
* x <2>:                                 Folders.             (line  71)
* x <3>:                                 Navigating.          (line  46)
* x <4>:                                 Leaving MH-E.        (line   6)
* x:                                     Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  63)
* X ?:                                   Reading Mail.        (line 148)
* X s <1>:                               Files and Pipes.     (line  21)
* X s:                                   Reading Mail.        (line 152)
* X u:                                   Reading Mail.        (line 152)
* | <1>:                                 Files and Pipes.     (line  14)
* |:                                     Reading Mail.        (line  47)


File: mh-e,  Node: Command Index,  Next: Option Index,  Prev: Key Index,  Up: Top

Command Index
*************

 [index ]
* Menu:

* add-hook:                              Conventions.         (line  80)
* backward-char:                         Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  42)
* browse-url-at-mouse:                   HTML.                (line  93)
* call-process:                          Junk.                (line  67)
* customize-face:                        Conventions.         (line  74)
* customize-group <1>:                   Options.             (line  33)
* customize-group:                       Conventions.         (line  68)
* customize-option <1>:                  Options.             (line   6)
* customize-option:                      Conventions.         (line  68)
* delete-frame:                          Speedbar.            (line  37)
* describe-mode <1>:                     Using This Manual.   (line   9)
* describe-mode <2>:                     Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  75)
* describe-mode:                         Sending Mail Tour.   (line  44)
* dired:                                 Folders.             (line 384)
* dired-do-rename:                       Folders.             (line 384)
* display-time <1>:                      Reading Mail.        (line  11)
* display-time:                          Incorporating Mail.  (line  39)
* fill-paragraph:                        Editing Message.     (line  62)
* forward-char:                          Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  42)
* goto-address-at-point <1>:             Sending Mail.        (line  11)
* goto-address-at-point:                 Viewing.             (line 113)
* help-with-tutorial <1>:                Conventions.         (line 106)
* help-with-tutorial:                    Preface.             (line  19)
* indent-relative:                       Editing Message.     (line  19)
* ispell-complete-word:                  Editing Message.     (line  32)
* ispell-message:                        Sending Message.     (line  12)
* kill-buffer:                           Killing Draft.       (line   6)
* mailcap-mime-info:                     Viewing Attachments. (line  48)
* mailcap-mime-types:                    Adding Attachments.  (line  32)
* mh-alias-add-alias:                    Aliases.             (line 175)
* mh-alias-apropos:                      Aliases.             (line  18)
* mh-alias-grab-from-field:              Aliases.             (line  21)
* mh-alias-minibuffer-confirm-address:   Aliases.             (line 102)
* mh-alias-reload:                       Aliases.             (line  24)
* mh-annotate-msg:                       Sending Mail.        (line  89)
* mh-burst-digest <1>:                   Digests.             (line  13)
* mh-burst-digest:                       Reading Mail.        (line  67)
* mh-catchup:                            Folders.             (line  24)
* mh-check-whom <1>:                     Miscellaneous.       (line  41)
* mh-check-whom <2>:                     Checking Recipients. (line   6)
* mh-check-whom:                         Editing Drafts.      (line 150)
* mh-compose-forward <1>:                Adding Attachments.  (line 109)
* mh-compose-forward:                    Editing Drafts.      (line  85)
* mh-compose-insertion <1>:              Adding Attachments.  (line  99)
* mh-compose-insertion:                  Editing Drafts.      (line  94)
* mh-copy-msg:                           Folders.             (line  14)
* mh-customize:                          Options.             (line  33)
* mh-delete-msg <1>:                     Navigating.          (line  23)
* mh-delete-msg:                         Reading Mail.        (line  54)
* mh-delete-msg-from-seq:                Sequences.           (line  21)
* mh-delete-msg-no-motion <1>:           Navigating.          (line  33)
* mh-delete-msg-no-motion:               Reading Mail.        (line  50)
* mh-delete-seq:                         Sequences.           (line  24)
* mh-delete-subject:                     Navigating.          (line  37)
* mh-delete-subject-or-thread <1>:       Threading.           (line  60)
* mh-delete-subject-or-thread <2>:       Navigating.          (line  37)
* mh-delete-subject-or-thread:           Reading Mail.        (line  73)
* mh-display-with-external-viewer <1>:   Viewing Attachments. (line  48)
* mh-display-with-external-viewer:       Reading Mail.        (line  90)
* mh-edit-again <1>:                     Editing Again.       (line   6)
* mh-edit-again <2>:                     Redistributing.      (line  12)
* mh-edit-again:                         Sending Mail.        (line  19)
* mh-execute-commands <1>:               Folders.             (line  71)
* mh-execute-commands <2>:               Navigating.          (line  46)
* mh-execute-commands:                   Incorporating Mail.  (line  90)
* mh-extract-rejected-mail <1>:          Editing Again.       (line  17)
* mh-extract-rejected-mail:              Sending Mail.        (line  20)
* mh-find-path:                          Getting Started.     (line  69)
* mh-first-msg <1>:                      Navigating.          (line   6)
* mh-first-msg:                          Reading Mail.        (line 109)
* mh-folder-inline-mime-part <1>:        Viewing Attachments. (line 131)
* mh-folder-inline-mime-part:            Reading Mail.        (line  93)
* mh-folder-save-mime-part <1>:          Viewing Attachments. (line  63)
* mh-folder-save-mime-part:              Reading Mail.        (line  96)
* mh-folder-toggle-mime-part <1>:        Viewing Attachments. (line  37)
* mh-folder-toggle-mime-part:            Reading Mail.        (line 103)
* mh-forward <1>:                        Forwarding.          (line   6)
* mh-forward:                            Sending Mail.        (line  24)
* mh-fully-kill-draft <1>:               Killing Draft.       (line   6)
* mh-fully-kill-draft:                   Editing Drafts.      (line 140)
* mh-goto-msg <1>:                       Navigating.          (line   6)
* mh-goto-msg:                           Reading Mail.        (line  70)
* mh-header-display <1>:                 Viewing.             (line   6)
* mh-header-display:                     Reading Mail.        (line  27)
* mh-help <1>:                           Miscellaneous.       (line  26)
* mh-help <2>:                           Searching.           (line  12)
* mh-help <3>:                           Editing Drafts.      (line  26)
* mh-help <4>:                           Folders.             (line  10)
* mh-help <5>:                           Reading Mail.        (line  23)
* mh-help:                               Using This Manual.   (line   9)
* mh-inc-folder:                         Incorporating Mail.  (line  10)
* mh-inc-spool-*:                        Incorporating Mail.  (line  67)
* mh-index-do-search:                    Searching.           (line  13)
* mh-index-new-messages:                 Folders.             (line  33)
* mh-index-next-folder:                  Searching.           (line  67)
* mh-index-previous-folder:              Searching.           (line  68)
* mh-index-sequenced-messages:           Folders.             (line  39)
* mh-index-ticked-messages <1>:          Sequences.           (line  73)
* mh-index-ticked-messages:              Folders.             (line  21)
* mh-index-visit-folder:                 Searching.           (line  71)
* mh-insert-auto-fields <1>:             Identities.          (line  14)
* mh-insert-auto-fields:                 Editing Drafts.      (line 158)
* mh-insert-identity <1>:                Identities.          (line  13)
* mh-insert-identity:                    Editing Drafts.      (line  32)
* mh-insert-letter <1>:                  Inserting Messages.  (line   6)
* mh-insert-letter:                      Editing Drafts.      (line  79)
* mh-insert-signature <1>:               Signature.           (line   6)
* mh-insert-signature:                   Editing Drafts.      (line 143)
* mh-insert-signature, example:          Composing.           (line  41)
* mh-junk-blacklist:                     Junk.                (line  19)
* mh-junk-whitelist:                     Junk.                (line  22)
* mh-kill-folder <1>:                    Searching.           (line 185)
* mh-kill-folder <2>:                    Folders.             (line  27)
* mh-kill-folder:                        Miscellaneous Commands and Options.
                                                              (line  14)
* mh-last-msg <1>:                       Navigating.          (line   6)
* mh-last-msg:                           Reading Mail.        (line 112)
* mh-letter-complete <1>:                Aliases.             (line  14)
* mh-letter-complete <2>:                Editing Message.     (line  32)
* mh-letter-complete:                    Editing Drafts.      (line  12)
* mh-letter-complete-or-space <1>:       Aliases.             (line  13)
* mh-letter-complete-or-space <2>:       Editing Message.     (line  32)
* mh-letter-complete-or-space:           Editing Drafts.      (line  11)
* mh-letter-confirm-address <1>:         Aliases.             (line 102)
* mh-letter-confirm-address <2>:         Editing Message.     (line  32)
* mh-letter-confirm-address:             Editing Drafts.      (line  16)
* mh-letter-next-header-field-or-indent <1>: Editing Message. (line  19)
* mh-letter-next-header-field-or-indent: Editing Drafts.      (line  19)
* mh-letter-previous-header-field <1>:   Editing Message.     (line  19)
* mh-letter-previous-header-field:       Editing Drafts.      (line  22)
* mh-letter-toggle-header-field-display <1>: Editing Message. (line  47)
* mh-letter-toggle-header-field-display: Editing Drafts.      (line 146)
* mh-list-folders <1>:                   Miscellaneous.       (line  24)
* mh-list-folders:                       Folders.             (line  30)
* mh-list-sequences:                     Sequences.           (line  27)
* mh-mh-compose-anon-ftp <1>:            Adding Attachments.  (line 118)
* mh-mh-compose-anon-ftp:                Editing Drafts.      (line  89)
* mh-mh-compose-external-compressed-tar <1>: Adding Attachments.
                                                              (line 126)
* mh-mh-compose-external-compressed-tar: Editing Drafts.      (line 110)
* mh-mh-compose-external-type <1>:       Adding Attachments.  (line 136)
* mh-mh-compose-external-type:           Editing Drafts.      (line 119)
* mh-mh-to-mime <1>:                     Adding Attachments.  (line 201)
* mh-mh-to-mime:                         Editing Drafts.      (line  36)
* mh-mh-to-mime-undo <1>:                Adding Attachments.  (line 201)
* mh-mh-to-mime-undo:                    Editing Drafts.      (line 115)
* mh-mime-save-parts <1>:                Viewing Attachments. (line  72)
* mh-mime-save-parts:                    Reading Mail.        (line  87)
* mh-mml-secure-message-encrypt <1>:     Sending PGP.         (line  11)
* mh-mml-secure-message-encrypt:         Editing Drafts.      (line  82)
* mh-mml-secure-message-sign <1>:        Sending PGP.         (line  11)
* mh-mml-secure-message-sign:            Editing Drafts.      (line 107)
* mh-mml-secure-message-signencrypt <1>: Sending PGP.         (line  11)
* mh-mml-secure-message-signencrypt:     Editing Drafts.      (line 126)
* mh-mml-to-mime <1>:                    Adding Attachments.  (line 168)
* mh-mml-to-mime:                        Editing Drafts.      (line  99)
* mh-mml-unsecure-message <1>:           Sending PGP.         (line  27)
* mh-mml-unsecure-message:               Editing Drafts.      (line 103)
* mh-modify <1>:                         Miscellaneous Commands and Options.
                                                              (line   8)
* mh-modify:                             Reading Mail.        (line 106)
* mh-msg-is-in-seq:                      Sequences.           (line  36)
* mh-narrow-to-cc:                       Limits.              (line  16)
* mh-narrow-to-from:                     Limits.              (line  19)
* mh-narrow-to-range:                    Limits.              (line  23)
* mh-narrow-to-seq:                      Sequences.           (line  30)
* mh-narrow-to-subject:                  Limits.              (line  26)
* mh-narrow-to-tick <1>:                 Sequences.           (line  18)
* mh-narrow-to-tick:                     Limits.              (line  13)
* mh-narrow-to-to:                       Limits.              (line  30)
* mh-next-button <1>:                    Viewing Attachments. (line  25)
* mh-next-button:                        Reading Mail.        (line  81)
* mh-next-undeleted-msg <1>:             Navigating.          (line   6)
* mh-next-undeleted-msg:                 Reading Mail.        (line 121)
* mh-next-unread-msg <1>:                Navigating.          (line   6)
* mh-next-unread-msg:                    Reading Mail.        (line 115)
* mh-open-line <1>:                      Editing Message.     (line  80)
* mh-open-line:                          Editing Drafts.      (line 137)
* mh-pack-folder <1>:                    Folders.             (line  36)
* mh-pack-folder:                        Miscellaneous Commands and Options.
                                                              (line  14)
* mh-page-digest <1>:                    Digests.             (line   6)
* mh-page-digest:                        Reading Mail.        (line  61)
* mh-page-digest-backwards <1>:          Digests.             (line   6)
* mh-page-digest-backwards:              Reading Mail.        (line  64)
* mh-page-msg <1>:                       Viewing.             (line   6)
* mh-page-msg:                           Reading Mail.        (line  38)
* mh-pick-do-search:                     Searching.           (line  16)
* mh-pipe-msg <1>:                       Files and Pipes.     (line  14)
* mh-pipe-msg:                           Reading Mail.        (line  47)
* mh-prefix-help <1>:                    Junk.                (line  17)
* mh-prefix-help <2>:                    Sequences.           (line  14)
* mh-prefix-help <3>:                    Limits.              (line  11)
* mh-prefix-help <4>:                    Threading.           (line  19)
* mh-prefix-help <5>:                    Folders.             (line  17)
* mh-prefix-help:                        Reading Mail.        (line  57)
* mh-press-button <1>:                   Viewing Attachments. (line  25)
* mh-press-button:                       Reading Mail.        (line 163)
* mh-prev-button <1>:                    Viewing Attachments. (line  25)
* mh-prev-button:                        Reading Mail.        (line  84)
* mh-previous-page <1>:                  Viewing.             (line   6)
* mh-previous-page:                      Reading Mail.        (line  41)
* mh-previous-undeleted-msg <1>:         Navigating.          (line   6)
* mh-previous-undeleted-msg:             Reading Mail.        (line 124)
* mh-previous-unread-msg <1>:            Navigating.          (line   6)
* mh-previous-unread-msg:                Reading Mail.        (line 118)
* mh-print-msg <1>:                      Printing.            (line  35)
* mh-print-msg:                          Reading Mail.        (line 142)
* mh-ps-print-msg <1>:                   Printing.            (line   6)
* mh-ps-print-msg:                       Reading Mail.        (line 145)
* mh-ps-print-msg-file <1>:              Printing.            (line   6)
* mh-ps-print-msg-file:                  Reading Mail.        (line 139)
* mh-ps-print-toggle-color <1>:          Printing.            (line  18)
* mh-ps-print-toggle-color:              Reading Mail.        (line 131)
* mh-ps-print-toggle-faces <1>:          Printing.            (line  26)
* mh-ps-print-toggle-faces:              Reading Mail.        (line 135)
* mh-put-msg-in-seq:                     Sequences.           (line  33)
* mh-quit:                               Folders.             (line  61)
* mh-redistribute <1>:                   Redistributing.      (line   6)
* mh-redistribute:                       Sending Mail.        (line  33)
* mh-refile-msg:                         Folders.             (line  58)
* mh-refile-or-write-again <1>:          Folders.             (line  11)
* mh-refile-or-write-again:              Files and Pipes.     (line   6)
* mh-reply <1>:                          Replying.            (line   6)
* mh-reply:                              Sending Mail.        (line  27)
* mh-rescan-folder <1>:                  Searching.           (line 176)
* mh-rescan-folder:                      Folders.             (line  42)
* mh-rescan-folder, example:             Incorporating Mail.  (line  90)
* mh-rmail <1>:                          Reading Mail.        (line   6)
* mh-rmail <2>:                          Leaving MH-E.        (line  12)
* mh-rmail:                              Reading Mail Tour.   (line   6)
* mh-rmail, example:                     Miscellaneous Commands and Options.
                                                              (line  42)
* mh-search <1>:                         Searching.           (line   6)
* mh-search <2>:                         Tool Bar.            (line  42)
* mh-search:                             Folders.             (line  45)
* mh-search-folder:                      Searching.           (line  93)
* mh-search-p:                           Folders.             (line 330)
* mh-send <1>:                           Composing.           (line  16)
* mh-send:                               Sending Mail.        (line  30)
* mh-send-letter <1>:                    Sending Message.     (line   6)
* mh-send-letter:                        Editing Drafts.      (line  29)
* mh-set-cmd-note:                       Scan Line Formats.   (line  34)
* mh-show <1>:                           Viewing.             (line   6)
* mh-show:                               Reading Mail.        (line  24)
* mh-show, example:                      Incorporating Mail.  (line  90)
* mh-show-mouse <1>:                     Viewing.             (line   6)
* mh-show-mouse:                         Reading Mail.        (line 156)
* mh-show-preferred-alternative <1>:     Viewing Attachments. (line 125)
* mh-show-preferred-alternative:         Reading Mail.        (line  30)
* mh-signature-separator-p:              Signature.           (line  14)
* mh-smail <1>:                          Composing.           (line   6)
* mh-smail <2>:                          Sending Mail.        (line   6)
* mh-smail <3>:                          Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  72)
* mh-smail:                              Sending Mail Tour.   (line   6)
* mh-smail-other-window <1>:             Composing.           (line   6)
* mh-smail-other-window:                 Sending Mail.        (line  39)
* mh-sort-folder:                        Folders.             (line  48)
* mh-speed-contract-folder:              Speedbar.            (line  25)
* mh-speed-expand-folder:                Speedbar.            (line  21)
* mh-speed-refresh:                      Speedbar.            (line  29)
* mh-speed-view:                         Speedbar.            (line  19)
* mh-store-buffer:                       Files and Pipes.     (line  31)
* mh-store-msg <1>:                      Files and Pipes.     (line  21)
* mh-store-msg:                          Reading Mail.        (line 152)
* mh-thread-ancestor:                    Threading.           (line  36)
* mh-thread-delete <1>:                  Threading.           (line  24)
* mh-thread-delete:                      Navigating.          (line  37)
* mh-thread-next-sibling:                Threading.           (line  30)
* mh-thread-previous-sibling:            Threading.           (line  33)
* mh-thread-refile:                      Threading.           (line  21)
* mh-to-fcc <1>:                         Editing Message.     (line  14)
* mh-to-fcc:                             Editing Drafts.      (line  55)
* mh-to-field <1>:                       Searching.           (line  22)
* mh-to-field <2>:                       Editing Message.     (line   6)
* mh-to-field:                           Editing Drafts.      (line  39)
* mh-toggle-mh-decode-mime-flag <1>:     Viewing Attachments. (line  11)
* mh-toggle-mh-decode-mime-flag:         Reading Mail.        (line  34)
* mh-toggle-mime-buttons <1>:            Viewing Attachments. (line  88)
* mh-toggle-mime-buttons:                Reading Mail.        (line  99)
* mh-toggle-showing:                     Folders.             (line  64)
* mh-toggle-threads:                     Threading.           (line  27)
* mh-toggle-tick:                        Sequences.           (line  13)
* mh-undo <1>:                           Folders.             (line  68)
* mh-undo:                               Navigating.          (line  37)
* mh-undo-folder:                        Folders.             (line  51)
* mh-update-sequences:                   Sequences.           (line  43)
* mh-version <1>:                        Miscellaneous.       (line   8)
* mh-version:                            Getting Started.     (line  11)
* mh-visit-folder <1>:                   Speedbar.            (line   6)
* mh-visit-folder:                       Folders.             (line  55)
* mh-widen <1>:                          Sequences.           (line  40)
* mh-widen:                              Limits.              (line  33)
* mh-write-msg-to-file <1>:              Folders.             (line 214)
* mh-write-msg-to-file <2>:              Files and Pipes.     (line   6)
* mh-write-msg-to-file:                  Reading Mail.        (line  44)
* mh-yank-behavior:                      Inserting Messages.  (line   6)
* mh-yank-cur-msg <1>:                   Inserting Letter.    (line   6)
* mh-yank-cur-msg:                       Editing Drafts.      (line 154)
* minibuffer-complete:                   Aliases.             (line  74)
* next-line <1>:                         Navigating.          (line  18)
* next-line:                             Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  42)
* open-line:                             Editing Message.     (line  80)
* previous-line <1>:                     Navigating.          (line  18)
* previous-line:                         Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  42)
* setq <1>:                              Scan Line Formats.   (line  95)
* setq:                                  Conventions.         (line  65)
* trivial-cite:                          Inserting Letter.    (line  65)


File: mh-e,  Node: Option Index,  Next: Concept Index,  Prev: Command Index,  Up: Top

Option (Variable) Index
***********************

 [index ]
* Menu:

* exec-path:                             Getting Started.     (line  45)
* gnus-emphasis-alist:                   Viewing.             (line 120)
* gnus-secondary-select-methods:         Procmail.            (line  83)
* goto-address-highlight-p:              Viewing.             (line 113)
* mail-citation-hook <1>:                Inserting Letter.    (line  24)
* mail-citation-hook:                    Editing Drafts.      (line 218)
* mail-mode-hook:                        Composing.           (line  34)
* mail-sources:                          Procmail.            (line  88)
* mail-user-agent <1>:                   Procmail.            (line  90)
* mail-user-agent:                       Sending Mail.        (line  11)
* message-mail-user-agent:               Procmail.            (line  92)
* mh-adaptive-cmd-note-flag:             Scan Line Formats.   (line  13)
* mh-after-commands-processed-hook:      Folders.             (line 101)
* mh-alias-completion-ignore-case-flag:  Aliases.             (line  32)
* mh-alias-expand-aliases-flag:          Aliases.             (line  36)
* mh-alias-flash-on-comma <1>:           Aliases.             (line  40)
* mh-alias-flash-on-comma:               Editing Message.     (line  32)
* mh-alias-insert-file:                  Aliases.             (line  44)
* mh-alias-insertion-location:           Aliases.             (line  48)
* mh-alias-local-users:                  Aliases.             (line  52)
* mh-alias-local-users-prefix:           Aliases.             (line  55)
* mh-alias-passwd-gecos-comma-separator-flag: Aliases.        (line  59)
* mh-alias-reloaded-hook:                Aliases.             (line  65)
* mh-annotate-list:                      Sending Mail.        (line  89)
* mh-annotate-msg-hook:                  Sending Mail.        (line  80)
* mh-auto-fields-list:                   Identities.          (line  22)
* mh-auto-fields-prompt-flag:            Identities.          (line  26)
* mh-before-commands-processed-hook:     Folders.             (line 105)
* mh-before-quit-hook:                   Folders.             (line 109)
* mh-before-quit-hook, example:          Folders.             (line 359)
* mh-before-send-letter-hook <1>:        Sending Message.     (line  12)
* mh-before-send-letter-hook:            Editing Drafts.      (line 222)
* mh-bury-show-buffer-flag <1>:          Miscellaneous Commands and Options.
                                                              (line  27)
* mh-bury-show-buffer-flag:              Reading Mail.        (line 171)
* mh-bury-show-buffer-flag, example:     Options.             (line  15)
* mh-clean-message-header-flag <1>:      Viewing.             (line  31)
* mh-clean-message-header-flag:          Reading Mail.        (line 174)
* mh-cmd-note:                           Scan Line Formats.   (line 255)
* mh-compose-forward-as-mime-flag <1>:   Forwarding.          (line  14)
* mh-compose-forward-as-mime-flag:       Sending Mail.        (line  48)
* mh-compose-insertion <1>:              Adding Attachments.  (line  21)
* mh-compose-insertion:                  Editing Drafts.      (line 168)
* mh-compose-letter-function <1>:        Composing.           (line  64)
* mh-compose-letter-function:            Sending Mail.        (line  52)
* mh-compose-prompt-flag <1>:            Aliases.             (line  74)
* mh-compose-prompt-flag <2>:            Composing.           (line  25)
* mh-compose-prompt-flag:                Sending Mail.        (line  55)
* mh-compose-skipped-header-fields <1>:  Editing Message.     (line  19)
* mh-compose-skipped-header-fields:      Editing Drafts.      (line 172)
* mh-compose-space-does-completion-flag <1>: Editing Message. (line  32)
* mh-compose-space-does-completion-flag: Editing Drafts.      (line 177)
* mh-current-folder <1>:                 Sending Mail.        (line  89)
* mh-current-folder:                     Folders.             (line 236)
* mh-decode-mime-flag <1>:               Viewing Attachments. (line  11)
* mh-decode-mime-flag <2>:               Viewing.             (line 120)
* mh-decode-mime-flag:                   Reading Mail.        (line 177)
* mh-default-folder-for-message-function: Folder Selection.   (line  15)
* mh-default-folder-list:                Folder Selection.    (line  19)
* mh-default-folder-must-exist-flag:     Folder Selection.    (line  22)
* mh-default-folder-prefix:              Folder Selection.    (line  25)
* mh-delete-msg-hook <1>:                Navigating.          (line  50)
* mh-delete-msg-hook:                    Reading Mail.        (line 255)
* mh-delete-yanked-msg-window-flag <1>:  Inserting Letter.    (line  32)
* mh-delete-yanked-msg-window-flag:      Editing Drafts.      (line 180)
* mh-display-buttons-for-alternatives-flag <1>: Viewing Attachments.
                                                              (line 113)
* mh-display-buttons-for-alternatives-flag: Reading Mail.     (line 181)
* mh-display-buttons-for-inline-parts-flag <1>: Viewing Attachments.
                                                              (line  88)
* mh-display-buttons-for-inline-parts-flag: Reading Mail.     (line 185)
* mh-do-not-confirm-flag <1>:            Miscellaneous Commands and Options.
                                                              (line  14)
* mh-do-not-confirm-flag:                Reading Mail.        (line 189)
* mh-draft-folder:                       Getting Started.     (line  69)
* mh-extract-from-attribution-verb <1>:  Inserting Letter.    (line  18)
* mh-extract-from-attribution-verb:      Editing Drafts.      (line 183)
* mh-fetch-x-image-url <1>:              Viewing.             (line  60)
* mh-fetch-x-image-url:                  Reading Mail.        (line 193)
* mh-find-path-hook:                     Getting Started.     (line  69)
* mh-flists-present-flag:                Getting Started.     (line  57)
* mh-folder-address <1>:                 Scan Line Formats.   (line 196)
* mh-folder-address:                     Folders.             (line 134)
* mh-folder-body <1>:                    Scan Line Formats.   (line 114)
* mh-folder-body:                        Folders.             (line 137)
* mh-folder-cur-msg-number <1>:          Scan Line Formats.   (line 121)
* mh-folder-cur-msg-number:              Folders.             (line 140)
* mh-folder-date <1>:                    Scan Line Formats.   (line 134)
* mh-folder-date:                        Folders.             (line 143)
* mh-folder-deleted <1>:                 Scan Line Formats.   (line 144)
* mh-folder-deleted:                     Folders.             (line 146)
* mh-folder-followup <1>:                Scan Line Formats.   (line 233)
* mh-folder-followup:                    Folders.             (line 149)
* mh-folder-font-lock-keywords:          Scan Line Formats.   (line 114)
* mh-folder-mode-hook:                   Folders.             (line 112)
* mh-folder-mode-hook, example:          Folders.             (line 183)
* mh-folder-msg-number <1>:              Scan Line Formats.   (line 156)
* mh-folder-msg-number:                  Folders.             (line 152)
* mh-folder-refiled <1>:                 Scan Line Formats.   (line 208)
* mh-folder-refiled:                     Folders.             (line 155)
* mh-folder-scan-format:                 Folders.             (line 164)
* mh-folder-sent-to-me-hint:             Folders.             (line 158)
* mh-folder-sent-to-me-sender:           Scan Line Formats.   (line 220)
* mh-folder-subject <1>:                 Scan Line Formats.   (line 233)
* mh-folder-subject:                     Folders.             (line 170)
* mh-folder-tick:                        Folders.             (line 173)
* mh-folder-to <1>:                      Scan Line Formats.   (line 196)
* mh-folder-to:                          Folders.             (line 176)
* mh-forward-hook <1>:                   Forwarding.          (line   6)
* mh-forward-hook:                       Sending Mail.        (line  83)
* mh-forward-subject-format <1>:         Forwarding.          (line  26)
* mh-forward-subject-format:             Sending Mail.        (line  59)
* mh-graphical-emphasis-flag <1>:        Viewing.             (line 120)
* mh-graphical-emphasis-flag:            Reading Mail.        (line 200)
* mh-graphical-smileys-flag <1>:         Viewing.             (line 120)
* mh-graphical-smileys-flag:             Reading Mail.        (line 197)
* mh-highlight-citation-style <1>:       Viewing.             (line 105)
* mh-highlight-citation-style:           Reading Mail.        (line 203)
* mh-identity-default:                   Identities.          (line  30)
* mh-identity-handlers:                  Identities.          (line  34)
* mh-identity-list:                      Identities.          (line  37)
* mh-inbox:                              Getting Started.     (line  69)
* mh-inc-folder-hook:                    Incorporating Mail.  (line  23)
* mh-inc-folder-hook, example:           Incorporating Mail.  (line  90)
* mh-inc-prog:                           Incorporating Mail.  (line  15)
* mh-inc-spool-list:                     Incorporating Mail.  (line  18)
* mh-ins-buf-prefix <1>:                 Inserting Messages.  (line   6)
* mh-ins-buf-prefix <2>:                 Inserting Letter.    (line   6)
* mh-ins-buf-prefix <3>:                 Editing Message.     (line  62)
* mh-ins-buf-prefix:                     Editing Drafts.      (line 187)
* mh-insert-signature-hook <1>:          Signature.           (line  30)
* mh-insert-signature-hook:              Editing Drafts.      (line 229)
* mh-insert-x-mailer-flag <1>:           Composing.           (line  29)
* mh-insert-x-mailer-flag:               Sending Mail.        (line  62)
* mh-interpret-number-as-range-flag:     Ranges.              (line  45)
* mh-invisible-header-fields <1>:        Viewing.             (line  31)
* mh-invisible-header-fields:            Reading Mail.        (line 210)
* mh-invisible-header-fields-compiled:   Inserting Messages.  (line   6)
* mh-invisible-header-fields-default <1>: Viewing.            (line  31)
* mh-invisible-header-fields-default:    Reading Mail.        (line 206)
* mh-junk-background:                    Junk.                (line  33)
* mh-junk-disposition:                   Junk.                (line  36)
* mh-junk-program:                       Junk.                (line  39)
* mh-kill-folder-suppress-prompt-hook:   Folders.             (line 116)
* mh-kill-folder-suppress-prompt-hooks:  Folders.             (line 330)
* mh-large-folder <1>:                   Threading.           (line  46)
* mh-large-folder:                       Folders.             (line  85)
* mh-letter-complete-function <1>:       Editing Message.     (line  32)
* mh-letter-complete-function:           Editing Drafts.      (line 191)
* mh-letter-fill-column <1>:             Editing Message.     (line  56)
* mh-letter-fill-column:                 Editing Drafts.      (line 195)
* mh-letter-header-field <1>:            Editing Message.     (line  19)
* mh-letter-header-field:                Editing Drafts.      (line 235)
* mh-letter-mode-hook <1>:               Composing.           (line  34)
* mh-letter-mode-hook:                   Sending Mail.        (line  86)
* mh-lib:                                Getting Started.     (line  57)
* mh-lib-progs:                          Getting Started.     (line  57)
* mh-lpr-command-format <1>:             Printing.            (line   6)
* mh-lpr-command-format:                 Reading Mail.        (line 213)
* mh-lpr-command-format, example:        Options.             (line   6)
* mh-max-inline-image-height <1>:        Viewing Attachments. (line 104)
* mh-max-inline-image-height:            Reading Mail.        (line 216)
* mh-max-inline-image-width <1>:         Viewing Attachments. (line 104)
* mh-max-inline-image-width:             Reading Mail.        (line 220)
* mh-mh-folder-sent-to-me-hint:          Scan Line Formats.   (line 220)
* mh-mh-to-mime-args:                    Adding Attachments.  (line 209)
* mh-mh-to-mime-hook <1>:                Adding Attachments.  (line 218)
* mh-mh-to-mime-hook:                    Editing Drafts.      (line 226)
* mh-mhl-format-file <1>:                Viewing.             (line  89)
* mh-mhl-format-file:                    Reading Mail.        (line 224)
* mh-mhl-format-file, example:           Options.             (line  27)
* mh-mime-save-parts-default-directory <1>: Viewing Attachments.
                                                              (line  72)
* mh-mime-save-parts-default-directory:  Reading Mail.        (line 228)
* mh-mml-method-default <1>:             Sending PGP.         (line  27)
* mh-mml-method-default:                 Editing Drafts.      (line 198)
* mh-new-messages-folders:               Folders.             (line  79)
* mh-note-copied:                        Scan Line Formats.   (line 262)
* mh-note-cur:                           Scan Line Formats.   (line 121)
* mh-note-deleted:                       Scan Line Formats.   (line 144)
* mh-note-dist:                          Scan Line Formats.   (line 275)
* mh-note-forw:                          Scan Line Formats.   (line 279)
* mh-note-printed:                       Scan Line Formats.   (line 283)
* mh-note-refiled:                       Scan Line Formats.   (line 208)
* mh-note-repl:                          Scan Line Formats.   (line 291)
* mh-note-seq:                           Scan Line Formats.   (line 295)
* mh-pack-folder-hook:                   Folders.             (line 120)
* mh-path:                               Getting Started.     (line  45)
* mh-previous-seq:                       Getting Started.     (line  69)
* mh-print-background-flag <1>:          Printing.            (line   6)
* mh-print-background-flag:              Reading Mail.        (line 231)
* mh-progs <1>:                          Scan Line Formats.   (line  88)
* mh-progs <2>:                          Incorporating Mail.  (line  41)
* mh-progs:                              Getting Started.     (line  57)
* mh-quit-hook:                          Folders.             (line 124)
* mh-quit-hook, example:                 Folders.             (line 359)
* mh-recenter-summary-flag:              Folders.             (line  89)
* mh-recursive-folders-flag:             Folders.             (line  92)
* mh-redist-full-contents-flag <1>:      Redistributing.      (line  16)
* mh-redist-full-contents-flag:          Sending Mail.        (line  66)
* mh-refile-msg-hook:                    Folders.             (line 127)
* mh-refile-preserves-sequences-flag:    Sequences.           (line  51)
* mh-reply-default-reply-to <1>:         Replying.            (line  21)
* mh-reply-default-reply-to:             Sending Mail.        (line  70)
* mh-reply-show-message-flag <1>:        Replying.            (line  51)
* mh-reply-show-message-flag:            Sending Mail.        (line  74)
* mh-scan-body-regexp:                   Scan Line Formats.   (line 114)
* mh-scan-cur-msg-number-regexp:         Scan Line Formats.   (line 123)
* mh-scan-cur-msg-number-regexp, example: Scan Line Formats.  (line 333)
* mh-scan-date-regexp:                   Scan Line Formats.   (line 136)
* mh-scan-deleted-msg-regexp:            Scan Line Formats.   (line 146)
* mh-scan-deleted-msg-regexp, example:   Scan Line Formats.   (line 338)
* mh-scan-format-file:                   Scan Line Formats.   (line  17)
* mh-scan-format-file, example:          Scan Line Formats.   (line 307)
* mh-scan-format-mh:                     Scan Line Formats.   (line  43)
* mh-scan-format-nmh <1>:                Scan Line Formats.   (line  43)
* mh-scan-format-nmh:                    Folders.             (line 156)
* mh-scan-good-msg-regexp:               Scan Line Formats.   (line 158)
* mh-scan-good-msg-regexp, example:      Scan Line Formats.   (line 327)
* mh-scan-msg-format-regexp:             Scan Line Formats.   (line 169)
* mh-scan-msg-format-string:             Scan Line Formats.   (line 176)
* mh-scan-msg-number-regexp:             Scan Line Formats.   (line 182)
* mh-scan-msg-number-regexp, example:    Scan Line Formats.   (line 322)
* mh-scan-msg-overflow-regexp:           Scan Line Formats.   (line 188)
* mh-scan-msg-search-regexp:             Scan Line Formats.   (line 192)
* mh-scan-msg-search-regexp, example:    Scan Line Formats.   (line 322)
* mh-scan-prog:                          Scan Line Formats.   (line  21)
* mh-scan-rcpt-regexp:                   Scan Line Formats.   (line 198)
* mh-scan-refiled-msg-regexp:            Scan Line Formats.   (line 210)
* mh-scan-refiled-msg-regexp, example:   Scan Line Formats.   (line 338)
* mh-scan-sent-to-me-sender-regexp <1>:  Scan Line Formats.   (line 134)
* mh-scan-sent-to-me-sender-regexp:      Folders.             (line 156)
* mh-scan-subject-regexp:                Scan Line Formats.   (line 235)
* mh-scan-valid-regexp:                  Scan Line Formats.   (line 107)
* mh-scan-valid-regexp, example:         Scan Line Formats.   (line 315)
* mh-search-folder:                      Searching.           (line  90)
* mh-search-mode-hook:                   Searching.           (line  85)
* mh-search-program:                     Searching.           (line  80)
* mh-seen-list:                          Sequences.           (line 120)
* mh-send-prog:                          Sending Message.     (line  16)
* mh-show-buffer-mode-line-buffer-id <1>: Viewing.            (line 147)
* mh-show-buffer-mode-line-buffer-id:    Reading Mail.        (line 235)
* mh-show-cc <1>:                        Viewing.             (line  25)
* mh-show-cc:                            Reading Mail.        (line 266)
* mh-show-date <1>:                      Viewing.             (line  25)
* mh-show-date:                          Reading Mail.        (line 269)
* mh-show-from <1>:                      Viewing.             (line  25)
* mh-show-from:                          Reading Mail.        (line 272)
* mh-show-header <1>:                    Viewing.             (line  25)
* mh-show-header:                        Reading Mail.        (line 275)
* mh-show-hook <1>:                      Viewing.             (line 140)
* mh-show-hook:                          Reading Mail.        (line 258)
* mh-show-maximum-size <1>:              Viewing.             (line  19)
* mh-show-maximum-size:                  Reading Mail.        (line 239)
* mh-show-mode-hook <1>:                 Viewing.             (line 140)
* mh-show-mode-hook:                     Reading Mail.        (line 261)
* mh-show-pgg-bad <1>:                   Reading PGP.         (line  70)
* mh-show-pgg-bad:                       Reading Mail.        (line 278)
* mh-show-pgg-good <1>:                  Reading PGP.         (line  70)
* mh-show-pgg-good:                      Reading Mail.        (line 281)
* mh-show-pgg-unknown <1>:               Reading PGP.         (line  70)
* mh-show-pgg-unknown:                   Reading Mail.        (line 284)
* mh-show-signature <1>:                 Viewing.             (line 134)
* mh-show-signature:                     Reading Mail.        (line 287)
* mh-show-subject <1>:                   Viewing.             (line  25)
* mh-show-subject:                       Reading Mail.        (line 290)
* mh-show-threads-flag:                  Threading.           (line  43)
* mh-show-to <1>:                        Viewing.             (line  25)
* mh-show-to:                            Reading Mail.        (line 293)
* mh-show-use-xface-flag <1>:            Viewing.             (line  44)
* mh-show-use-xface-flag:                Reading Mail.        (line 243)
* mh-show-xface <1>:                     Viewing.             (line  56)
* mh-show-xface:                         Reading Mail.        (line 296)
* mh-signature-file-name <1>:            Identities.          (line  66)
* mh-signature-file-name <2>:            Signature.           (line   9)
* mh-signature-file-name:                Editing Drafts.      (line 202)
* mh-signature-separator:                Signature.           (line  14)
* mh-signature-separator-flag <1>:       Signature.           (line  23)
* mh-signature-separator-flag:           Editing Drafts.      (line 205)
* mh-signature-separator-regexp:         Signature.           (line  14)
* mh-sortm-args:                         Folders.             (line  96)
* mh-speed-update-interval:              Speedbar.            (line  44)
* mh-speedbar-folder:                    Speedbar.            (line  51)
* mh-speedbar-folder-with-unseen-messages: Speedbar.          (line  54)
* mh-speedbar-selected-folder:           Speedbar.            (line  57)
* mh-speedbar-selected-folder-with-unseen-messages: Speedbar. (line  60)
* mh-store-default-directory <1>:        Files and Pipes.     (line  21)
* mh-store-default-directory:            Reading Mail.        (line 246)
* mh-summary-height <1>:                 Miscellaneous Commands and Options.
                                                              (line  20)
* mh-summary-height:                     Reading Mail.        (line 249)
* mh-sys-path:                           Getting Started.     (line  45)
* mh-tick-seq:                           Sequences.           (line  55)
* mh-ticked-messages-folders:            Folders.             (line  82)
* mh-tool-bar-folder-buttons:            Tool Bar.            (line  12)
* mh-tool-bar-letter-buttons:            Tool Bar.            (line  16)
* mh-tool-bar-search-function:           Tool Bar.            (line  20)
* mh-unseen-seq:                         Getting Started.     (line  69)
* mh-unseen-updated-hook:                Sequences.           (line  64)
* mh-update-sequences-after-mh-show-flag: Sequences.          (line  58)
* mh-user-path:                          Getting Started.     (line  69)
* mh-variant:                            Getting Started.     (line  45)
* mh-variant-in-use:                     Getting Started.     (line  45)
* mh-x-face-file <1>:                    Picture.             (line   6)
* mh-x-face-file:                        Editing Drafts.      (line 208)
* mh-xemacs-tool-bar-position:           Tool Bar.            (line  24)
* mh-xemacs-use-tool-bar-flag:           Tool Bar.            (line  27)
* mh-yank-behavior <1>:                  Inserting Messages.  (line   6)
* mh-yank-behavior <2>:                  Inserting Letter.    (line  24)
* mh-yank-behavior <3>:                  Editing Drafts.      (line 212)
* mh-yank-behavior:                      Replying.            (line  44)
* mm-discouraged-alternatives:           Viewing Attachments. (line 120)
* mm-text-html-renderer:                 HTML.                (line  17)
* nnmail-keep-last-article:              Procmail.            (line  97)
* pgg-encrypt-for-me:                    Sending PGP.         (line  42)
* ps-print-color-p:                      Printing.            (line  18)
* read-mail-command:                     Reading Mail.        (line  11)
* set-mh-cmd-note, example:              Scan Line Formats.   (line 333)
* text-mode-hook:                        Composing.           (line  34)
* transient-mark-mode:                   Ranges.              (line  38)


File: mh-e,  Node: Concept Index,  Prev: Option Index,  Up: Top

Concept Index
*************

 [index ]
* Menu:

* *MH-E Folders* <1>:                    Miscellaneous.       (line  24)
* *MH-E Folders*:                        Folders.             (line 309)
* *MH-E Help*:                           Miscellaneous.       (line  26)
* *MH-E Info*:                           Miscellaneous.       (line  12)
* *MH-E Log* <1>:                        Miscellaneous.       (line  33)
* *MH-E Log*:                            Junk.                (line  67)
* *MH-E Mail Delivery* <1>:              Miscellaneous.       (line  37)
* *MH-E Mail Delivery*:                  Sending Message.     (line   6)
* *MH-E Recipients* <1>:                 Miscellaneous.       (line  41)
* *MH-E Recipients*:                     Checking Recipients. (line   6)
* *MH-E Sequences* <1>:                  Miscellaneous.       (line  45)
* *MH-E Sequences*:                      Sequences.           (line  93)
* *mh-temp*:                             Miscellaneous.       (line  49)
* +inbox <1>:                            Reading Mail.        (line   6)
* +inbox:                                Incorporating Mail.  (line  27)
* +mhe-index:                            Searching.           (line 167)
* .emacs <1>:                            Composing.           (line   6)
* .emacs <2>:                            Miscellaneous Commands and Options.
                                                              (line  35)
* .emacs <3>:                            HTML.                (line  93)
* .emacs <4>:                            Incorporating Mail.  (line  35)
* .emacs <5>:                            Getting Started.     (line  61)
* .emacs:                                Conventions.         (line  65)
* .face:                                 Picture.             (line   6)
* .mh_profile <1>:                       Forwarding.          (line  14)
* .mh_profile:                           Folders.             (line 345)
* .mhe-x-image-cache:                    Viewing.             (line  85)
* .procmailrc <1>:                       Procmail.            (line  11)
* .procmailrc <2>:                       Junk.                (line  75)
* .procmailrc:                           Incorporating Mail.  (line  57)
* .signature:                            Signature.           (line   9)
* .spamassassin/user_prefs:              Junk.                (line 124)
* /etc/mailcap:                          Viewing Attachments. (line  48)
* /etc/mime.types:                       Adding Attachments.  (line  32)
* /etc/nmh/MailAliases:                  Aliases.             (line 117)
* /etc/passwd:                           Aliases.             (line 122)
* `MH & nmh: Email for Users & Programmers': Preface.         (line  29)
* abnormal hooks:                        Conventions.         (line  80)
* ali:                                   Aliases.             (line 117)
* alias completion:                      Editing Message.     (line  32)
* aliases:                               Aliases.             (line   6)
* Aliasfile: MH profile component:       Aliases.             (line 117)
* alternatives:                          Viewing Attachments. (line 113)
* ancestor, in threads:                  Threading.           (line  12)
* attachments:                           Viewing Attachments. (line   6)
* attachments, alternatives:             Viewing Attachments. (line 113)
* attachments, inline:                   Viewing Attachments. (line  88)
* attachments, inserting:                Adding Attachments.  (line  99)
* attachments, saving:                   Viewing Attachments. (line  63)
* attachments, viewing:                  Viewing Attachments. (line  37)
* Bcc: header field:                     Editing Message.     (line   6)
* Bill Wohler <1>:                       From Bill Wohler.    (line   6)
* Bill Wohler <2>:                       History.             (line   6)
* Bill Wohler:                           Preface.             (line  40)
* blacklisting:                          Junk.                (line  11)
* body parts:                            Viewing Attachments. (line   6)
* bogofilter:                            Junk.                (line  42)
* boldface, showing:                     Viewing.             (line 120)
* Brian Reid <1>:                        From Brian Reid.     (line   6)
* Brian Reid:                            History.             (line   6)
* browser, html2text:                    HTML.                (line  79)
* browser, links:                        HTML.                (line  46)
* browser, lynx:                         HTML.                (line  54)
* browser, w3:                           HTML.                (line  67)
* browser, w3m:                          HTML.                (line  30)
* browser, w3m-standalone:               HTML.                (line  37)
* buffers, *MH-E Folders* <1>:           Miscellaneous.       (line  24)
* buffers, *MH-E Folders*:               Folders.             (line 309)
* buffers, *MH-E Help*:                  Miscellaneous.       (line  26)
* buffers, *MH-E Info*:                  Miscellaneous.       (line  12)
* buffers, *MH-E Log* <1>:               Miscellaneous.       (line  33)
* buffers, *MH-E Log*:                   Junk.                (line  67)
* buffers, *MH-E Mail Delivery* <1>:     Miscellaneous.       (line  37)
* buffers, *MH-E Mail Delivery*:         Sending Message.     (line   6)
* buffers, *MH-E Recipients* <1>:        Miscellaneous.       (line  41)
* buffers, *MH-E Recipients*:            Checking Recipients. (line   6)
* buffers, *MH-E Sequences* <1>:         Miscellaneous.       (line  45)
* buffers, *MH-E Sequences*:             Sequences.           (line  93)
* buffers, *mh-temp*:                    Miscellaneous.       (line  49)
* bugs:                                  Bug Reports.         (line   6)
* burst:                                 Digests.             (line  13)
* buttons:                               Viewing Attachments. (line  21)
* Cc: header field:                      Editing Message.     (line   6)
* change log:                            Getting MH-E.        (line  11)
* checking recipients:                   Checking Recipients. (line   6)
* citations, highlighting:               Viewing.             (line 105)
* commands:                              Conventions.         (line  10)
* commands, MH:                          Conventions.         (line  10)
* commands, shell:                       Conventions.         (line  10)
* commands, Unix:                        Conventions.         (line  10)
* compface:                              Picture.             (line  17)
* completion <1>:                        Editing Message.     (line  32)
* completion:                            Conventions.         (line  98)
* completion, folders:                   Folder Selection.    (line   6)
* components:                            Composing.           (line  34)
* composing mail:                        Composing.           (line   6)
* content description:                   Adding Attachments.  (line  44)
* Content-Disposition: header field:     Viewing Attachments. (line 104)
* Content-Transfer-Encoding: header field: Junk.              (line 242)
* Content-Type: header field:            Junk.                (line 242)
* contributed software:                  Getting MH-E.        (line  31)
* conventions, Emacs:                    Conventions.         (line   6)
* conventions, key names:                Conventions.         (line  17)
* convert:                               Viewing.             (line  60)
* cur sequence:                          Sequences.           (line 100)
* customization group, mh:               Options.             (line  33)
* customization group, mh-alias:         Aliases.             (line  29)
* customization group, mh-folder:        Folders.             (line  77)
* customization group, mh-folder-selection: Folder Selection. (line  12)
* customization group, mh-identity:      Identities.          (line  20)
* customization group, mh-inc:           Incorporating Mail.  (line  13)
* customization group, mh-junk:          Junk.                (line  30)
* customization group, mh-letter:        Editing Drafts.      (line 165)
* customization group, mh-range:         Ranges.              (line  42)
* customization group, mh-scan-line-formats: Scan Line Formats.
                                                              (line  10)
* customization group, mh-search:        Searching.           (line  77)
* customization group, mh-sending-mail:  Sending Mail.        (line  44)
* customization group, mh-sequences:     Sequences.           (line  48)
* customization group, mh-show:          Reading Mail.        (line 168)
* customization group, mh-speedbar:      Speedbar.            (line  40)
* customization group, mh-thread:        Threading.           (line  41)
* customization group, mh-tool-bar:      Tool Bar.            (line   9)
* customization group, pgg <1>:          Sending PGP.         (line  39)
* customization group, pgg:              Reading PGP.         (line  75)
* customizing MH-E:                      Options.             (line   6)
* Dcc: header field:                     Editing Message.     (line   6)
* Debian <1>:                            Getting MH-E.        (line  21)
* Debian:                                Getting Started.     (line  23)
* decoding RFC 2047:                     Scan Line Formats.   (line  74)
* decrypting messages:                   Reading PGP.         (line  31)
* deleting messages:                     Navigating.          (line  23)
* digests:                               Digests.             (line   6)
* dist:                                  Redistributing.      (line   6)
* documentation:                         Getting MH-E.        (line  31)
* draft <1>:                             Editing Drafts.      (line   6)
* draft <2>:                             Editing Again.       (line   6)
* draft <3>:                             Forwarding.          (line   6)
* draft <4>:                             Replying.            (line  30)
* draft:                                 Composing.           (line   6)
* draft folder:                          Composing.           (line  16)
* Draft-Folder: MH profile component:    Getting Started.     (line  69)
* editing draft:                         Editing Drafts.      (line   6)
* editing header:                        Editing Message.     (line   6)
* editing message:                       Miscellaneous Commands and Options.
                                                              (line   8)
* Emacs <1>:                             Conventions.         (line   6)
* Emacs:                                 Preface.             (line   6)
* Emacs commands:                        Conventions.         (line  10)
* Emacs Lisp Manual:                     Using This Manual.   (line  35)
* Emacs, completion:                     Conventions.         (line  98)
* Emacs, conventions:                    Conventions.         (line   6)
* Emacs, customizing:                    Options.             (line   6)
* Emacs, Emacs Lisp Manual:              Using This Manual.   (line  35)
* Emacs, faces:                          Conventions.         (line  74)
* Emacs, file completion:                Conventions.         (line  98)
* Emacs, folder completion:              Conventions.         (line  98)
* Emacs, info:                           Using This Manual.   (line   9)
* Emacs, interrupting:                   Conventions.         (line 119)
* Emacs, mark:                           Conventions.         (line  90)
* Emacs, minibuffer:                     Conventions.         (line  98)
* Emacs, notification of new mail:       Incorporating Mail.  (line  35)
* Emacs, online help:                    Using This Manual.   (line   9)
* Emacs, options:                        Conventions.         (line  68)
* Emacs, packages, mm-decode:            Viewing Attachments. (line  11)
* Emacs, packages, ps-print:             Printing.            (line  31)
* Emacs, packages, supercite:            Inserting Letter.    (line  36)
* Emacs, packages, trivial-cite:         Inserting Letter.    (line  74)
* Emacs, packages, x-face:               Viewing.             (line  56)
* Emacs, point:                          Conventions.         (line  90)
* Emacs, prefix argument:                Conventions.         (line  45)
* Emacs, quitting <1>:                   Leaving MH-E.        (line   6)
* Emacs, quitting:                       Conventions.         (line 119)
* Emacs, region:                         Conventions.         (line  90)
* Emacs, setting options:                Options.             (line   6)
* Emacs, terms:                          Conventions.         (line   6)
* Emacs, variables:                      Conventions.         (line  65)
* emacsclient:                           Incorporating Mail.  (line  72)
* email addresses, highlighting:         Viewing.             (line 113)
* emphasis:                              Viewing.             (line 120)
* encrypted messages:                    Reading PGP.         (line   6)
* encrypting messages:                   Sending PGP.         (line   6)
* exiting:                               Folders.             (line 351)
* exporting folders:                     Leaving MH-E.        (line  16)
* expunging refiles and deletes:         Folders.             (line 220)
* Face: header field <1>:                Picture.             (line  12)
* Face: header field:                    Viewing.             (line  44)
* faces:                                 Conventions.         (line  74)
* FAQ:                                   MH FAQ and Support.  (line   6)
* Fcc: header field <1>:                 Identities.          (line 101)
* Fcc: header field:                     Sending PGP.         (line  42)
* file:                                  Adding Attachments.  (line  32)
* file completion:                       Conventions.         (line  98)
* files:                                 Files and Pipes.     (line   6)
* files, .emacs <1>:                     Composing.           (line   6)
* files, .emacs <2>:                     Miscellaneous Commands and Options.
                                                              (line  35)
* files, .emacs <3>:                     HTML.                (line  93)
* files, .emacs <4>:                     Incorporating Mail.  (line  35)
* files, .emacs <5>:                     Getting Started.     (line  61)
* files, .emacs:                         Conventions.         (line  65)
* files, .face:                          Picture.             (line   6)
* files, .mh_profile <1>:                Forwarding.          (line  14)
* files, .mh_profile:                    Folders.             (line 345)
* files, .mhe-x-image-cache:             Viewing.             (line  85)
* files, .procmailrc <1>:                Procmail.            (line  11)
* files, .procmailrc <2>:                Junk.                (line  75)
* files, .procmailrc:                    Incorporating Mail.  (line  57)
* files, .signature:                     Signature.           (line   9)
* files, .spamassassin/user_prefs:       Junk.                (line 124)
* files, /etc/mailcap:                   Viewing Attachments. (line  48)
* files, /etc/mime.types:                Adding Attachments.  (line  32)
* files, /etc/nmh/MailAliases:           Aliases.             (line 117)
* files, /etc/passwd:                    Aliases.             (line 122)
* files, components:                     Composing.           (line  34)
* files, draft:                          Editing Again.       (line   6)
* files, MH-E-NEWS:                      Getting MH-E.        (line  24)
* files, mhl.reply:                      Replying.            (line   6)
* files, README:                         Getting MH-E.        (line  24)
* filling paragraphs:                    Editing Message.     (line  62)
* filters:                               Limits.              (line   6)
* flists:                                Speedbar.            (line  40)
* folder:                                Folders.             (line 206)
* Folder > Incorporate New Mail menu item: Incorporating Mail.
                                                              (line  10)
* Folder > List Folders menu item:       Folders.             (line  30)
* Folder > Pack Folder menu item:        Folders.             (line  36)
* Folder > Quit MH-E menu item:          Folders.             (line  61)
* Folder > Rescan Folder menu item:      Folders.             (line  42)
* Folder > Search... menu item:          Folders.             (line  45)
* Folder > Sort Folder menu item:        Folders.             (line  48)
* Folder > Toggle Show/Folder menu item: Folders.             (line  64)
* Folder > View New Messages menu item:  Folders.             (line  33)
* Folder > Visit a Folder... menu item:  Folders.             (line  55)
* folder completion:                     Conventions.         (line  98)
* Folder menu <1>:                       Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* Folder menu <2>:                       Folders.             (line   6)
* Folder menu:                           Incorporating Mail.  (line   6)
* folder navigation:                     Speedbar.            (line   6)
* folders <1>:                           Folders.             (line   6)
* folders:                               Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  51)
* folders, +mhe-index:                   Searching.           (line 167)
* folders, completion:                   Folder Selection.    (line   6)
* folders, exporting:                    Leaving MH-E.        (line  16)
* folders, renaming:                     Folders.             (line 384)
* folders, selecting:                    Folder Selection.    (line   6)
* formail:                               Junk.                (line 215)
* forw:                                  Forwarding.          (line   6)
* forw: MH profile component:            Forwarding.          (line  14)
* forwarding:                            Forwarding.          (line   6)
* From: header field <1>:                Identities.          (line  50)
* From: header field:                    Editing Message.     (line   6)
* ftp:                                   Adding Attachments.  (line 118)
* full training:                         Junk.                (line 170)
* functions:                             Conventions.         (line  10)
* getting MH-E:                          Getting MH-E.        (line   6)
* Gildea, Stephen <1>:                   From Stephen Gildea. (line   6)
* Gildea, Stephen:                       History.             (line   6)
* GNU mailutils MH:                      Getting Started.     (line  23)
* gnuclient:                             Incorporating Mail.  (line  72)
* GnuPG:                                 Reading PGP.         (line   6)
* Gnus <1>:                              Procmail.            (line   6)
* Gnus <2>:                              Reading PGP.         (line   6)
* Gnus:                                  HTML.                (line   6)
* gnuserv:                               Incorporating Mail.  (line  72)
* GPG:                                   Reading PGP.         (line   6)
* grep:                                  Searching.           (line 206)
* ham:                                   Junk.                (line  11)
* header field, Bcc::                    Editing Message.     (line   6)
* header field, Cc::                     Editing Message.     (line   6)
* header field, Content-Disposition::    Viewing Attachments. (line 104)
* header field, Content-Transfer-Encoding:: Junk.             (line 242)
* header field, Content-Type::           Junk.                (line 242)
* header field, Dcc::                    Editing Message.     (line   6)
* header field, Face: <1>:               Picture.             (line  12)
* header field, Face::                   Viewing.             (line  44)
* header field, Fcc: <1>:                Identities.          (line 101)
* header field, Fcc::                    Sending PGP.         (line  42)
* header field, From: <1>:               Identities.          (line  50)
* header field, From::                   Editing Message.     (line   6)
* header field, Mail-Followup-To: <1>:   Identities.          (line 106)
* header field, Mail-Followup-To::       Editing Message.     (line   6)
* header field, Mail-Reply-To::          Editing Message.     (line   6)
* header field, Organization::           Identities.          (line  54)
* header field, Reply-To::               Editing Message.     (line   6)
* header field, Subject: <1>:            Junk.                (line 242)
* header field, Subject::                Editing Message.     (line   6)
* header field, To::                     Editing Message.     (line   6)
* header field, X-Bogosity::             Junk.                (line 177)
* header field, X-Face: <1>:             Picture.             (line  12)
* header field, X-Face::                 Viewing.             (line  44)
* header field, X-Image-URL: <1>:        Picture.             (line  12)
* header field, X-Image-URL::            Viewing.             (line  44)
* header field, X-Mailer::               Composing.           (line  29)
* header field, X-MHE-Checksum::         Searching.           (line 192)
* header field, X-Spam-Level::           Junk.                (line  84)
* header field, X-Spam-Status::          Junk.                (line  84)
* header field, X-SpamProbe::            Junk.                (line 215)
* help <1>:                              Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  75)
* help:                                  Sending Mail Tour.   (line  44)
* highlighting:                          Conventions.         (line  74)
* highlighting citations:                Viewing.             (line 105)
* highlighting email addresses:          Viewing.             (line 113)
* highlighting URLs:                     Viewing.             (line 113)
* history:                               Getting Started.     (line   6)
* history of MH-E:                       History.             (line   6)
* hooks:                                 Conventions.         (line  80)
* HTML:                                  HTML.                (line   6)
* html2text:                             HTML.                (line  79)
* identities:                            Identities.          (line   6)
* Identity > Customize Identities menu item: Identities.      (line  81)
* Identity > Insert Auto Fields menu item: Identities.        (line  14)
* Identity > Save as Default menu item:  Identities.          (line  81)
* Identity > Set Default for Session menu item: Identities.   (line  81)
* Identity menu <1>:                     Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* Identity menu:                         Identities.          (line  10)
* ImageMagick:                           Viewing.             (line  60)
* images:                                Adding Attachments.  (line  99)
* inc <1>:                               Scan Line Formats.   (line 107)
* inc <2>:                               Incorporating Mail.  (line  41)
* inc:                                   Reading Mail Tour.   (line   6)
* incorporating:                         Incorporating Mail.  (line   6)
* index:                                 Searching.           (line 244)
* index++:                               Searching.           (line 244)
* info <1>:                              Using This Manual.   (line   9)
* info:                                  Preface.             (line  29)
* inline attachments:                    Viewing Attachments. (line  88)
* inline images:                         Viewing Attachments. (line 104)
* inserting messages <1>:                Inserting Messages.  (line   6)
* inserting messages:                    Inserting Letter.    (line   6)
* install-mh:                            Getting Started.     (line  31)
* interrupting:                          Conventions.         (line 119)
* introduction:                          Tour Through MH-E.   (line   6)
* italics, showing:                      Viewing.             (line 120)
* Jim Larus <1>:                         From Jim Larus.      (line   6)
* Jim Larus:                             History.             (line   6)
* junk mail <1>:                         Junk.                (line   6)
* junk mail:                             Folders.             (line 253)
* key names:                             Conventions.         (line  17)
* key server:                            Reading PGP.         (line  17)
* keychain:                              Reading PGP.         (line  17)
* killing draft:                         Killing Draft.       (line   6)
* Larus, Jim <1>:                        From Jim Larus.      (line   6)
* Larus, Jim:                            History.             (line   6)
* Letter > Check Recipient menu item:    Editing Drafts.      (line 150)
* Letter > Compose Compressed tar (MH)... menu item: Editing Drafts.
                                                              (line 110)
* Letter > Compose Forward... menu item: Editing Drafts.      (line  85)
* Letter > Compose Get File (MH)... menu item: Editing Drafts.
                                                              (line  89)
* Letter > Compose Insertion... menu item: Editing Drafts.    (line  94)
* Letter > Insert a Message... menu item: Editing Drafts.     (line  79)
* Letter > Insert Signature menu item:   Editing Drafts.      (line 143)
* Letter > Kill This Draft menu item:    Editing Drafts.      (line 140)
* Letter > Pull in All Compositions (MH) menu item: Editing Drafts.
                                                              (line  36)
* Letter > Pull in All Compositions (MML) menu item: Editing Drafts.
                                                              (line  99)
* Letter > Revert to Non-MIME Edit (MH) menu item: Editing Drafts.
                                                              (line 115)
* Letter > Send This Draft menu item:    Editing Drafts.      (line  29)
* Letter > Split Current Line menu item: Editing Drafts.      (line 137)
* Letter > Yank Current Message menu item: Editing Drafts.    (line 154)
* Letter menu <1>:                       Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* Letter menu:                           Editing Drafts.      (line   6)
* limits:                                Limits.              (line   6)
* links:                                 HTML.                (line  46)
* links, following:                      Viewing.             (line 113)
* lpr:                                   Printing.            (line  35)
* lynx:                                  HTML.                (line  54)
* Mail mode:                             Composing.           (line  34)
* Mail-Followup-To: header field <1>:    Identities.          (line 106)
* Mail-Followup-To: header field:        Editing Message.     (line   6)
* Mail-Reply-To: header field:           Editing Message.     (line   6)
* Mailer-Daemon:                         Editing Again.       (line  17)
* mailing lists:                         Mailing Lists.       (line   6)
* mailing lists, reading:                Procmail.            (line   6)
* mairix:                                Searching.           (line 206)
* manual:                                Getting MH-E.        (line  31)
* mark <1>:                              Sequences.           (line 125)
* mark:                                  Conventions.         (line  90)
* Marshall Rose:                         Junk.                (line   6)
* mbox-style folder:                     Leaving MH-E.        (line  16)
* media types:                           Adding Attachments.  (line  27)
* menu bar:                              Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* menu item, Folder > Incorporate New Mail: Incorporating Mail.
                                                              (line  10)
* menu item, Folder > List Folders:      Folders.             (line  30)
* menu item, Folder > Pack Folder:       Folders.             (line  36)
* menu item, Folder > Quit MH-E:         Folders.             (line  61)
* menu item, Folder > Rescan Folder:     Folders.             (line  42)
* menu item, Folder > Search...:         Folders.             (line  45)
* menu item, Folder > Sort Folder:       Folders.             (line  48)
* menu item, Folder > Toggle Show/Folder: Folders.            (line  64)
* menu item, Folder > View New Messages: Folders.             (line  33)
* menu item, Folder > Visit a Folder...: Folders.             (line  55)
* menu item, Identity > Customize Identities: Identities.     (line  81)
* menu item, Identity > Insert Auto Fields: Identities.       (line  14)
* menu item, Identity > Save as Default: Identities.          (line  81)
* menu item, Identity > Set Default for Session: Identities.  (line  81)
* menu item, Letter > Check Recipient:   Editing Drafts.      (line 150)
* menu item, Letter > Compose Compressed tar (MH)...: Editing Drafts.
                                                              (line 110)
* menu item, Letter > Compose Forward...: Editing Drafts.     (line  85)
* menu item, Letter > Compose Get File (MH)...: Editing Drafts.
                                                              (line  89)
* menu item, Letter > Compose Insertion...: Editing Drafts.   (line  94)
* menu item, Letter > Insert a Message...: Editing Drafts.    (line  79)
* menu item, Letter > Insert Signature:  Editing Drafts.      (line 143)
* menu item, Letter > Kill This Draft:   Editing Drafts.      (line 140)
* menu item, Letter > Pull in All Compositions (MH): Editing Drafts.
                                                              (line  36)
* menu item, Letter > Pull in All Compositions (MML): Editing Drafts.
                                                              (line  99)
* menu item, Letter > Revert to Non-MIME Edit (MH): Editing Drafts.
                                                              (line 115)
* menu item, Letter > Send This Draft:   Editing Drafts.      (line  29)
* menu item, Letter > Split Current Line: Editing Drafts.     (line 137)
* menu item, Letter > Yank Current Message: Editing Drafts.   (line 154)
* menu item, Message > Burst Digest Message: Reading Mail.    (line  67)
* menu item, Message > Compose a New Message: Sending Mail.   (line  30)
* menu item, Message > Copy Message to Folder...: Folders.    (line  14)
* menu item, Message > Delete Message:   Reading Mail.        (line  54)
* menu item, Message > Edit Message Again: Sending Mail.      (line  19)
* menu item, Message > Execute Delete/Refile: Folders.        (line  71)
* menu item, Message > Forward Message...: Sending Mail.      (line  24)
* menu item, Message > Go to First Message: Reading Mail.     (line 109)
* menu item, Message > Go to Last Message: Reading Mail.      (line 112)
* menu item, Message > Go to Message by Number...: Reading Mail.
                                                              (line  70)
* menu item, Message > Modify Message:   Reading Mail.        (line 106)
* menu item, Message > Next Message:     Reading Mail.        (line 121)
* menu item, Message > Pipe Message to Command...: Reading Mail.
                                                              (line  47)
* menu item, Message > Previous Message: Reading Mail.        (line 124)
* menu item, Message > Print Message:    Reading Mail.        (line 142)
* menu item, Message > Re-edit a Bounced Message: Sending Mail.
                                                              (line  20)
* menu item, Message > Redistribute Message...: Sending Mail. (line  33)
* menu item, Message > Refile Message:   Folders.             (line  58)
* menu item, Message > Reply to Message...: Sending Mail.     (line  27)
* menu item, Message > Show Message:     Reading Mail.        (line  24)
* menu item, Message > Show Message with Header: Reading Mail.
                                                              (line  27)
* menu item, Message > Show Message with Preferred Alternative: Reading Mail.
                                                              (line  30)
* menu item, Message > Undo Delete/Refile: Folders.           (line  68)
* menu item, Message > Unpack Uuencoded Message...: Reading Mail.
                                                              (line 152)
* menu item, Message > Write Message to File...: Reading Mail.
                                                              (line  44)
* menu item, Search > Perform Search:    Searching.           (line  13)
* menu item, Search > Search with pick:  Searching.           (line  16)
* menu item, Sequence > Add Message to Sequence...: Sequences.
                                                              (line  33)
* menu item, Sequence > Delete Message from Sequence...: Sequences.
                                                              (line  21)
* menu item, Sequence > Delete Sequence...: Sequences.        (line  24)
* menu item, Sequence > List Sequences for Message: Sequences.
                                                              (line  36)
* menu item, Sequence > List Sequences in Folder...: Sequences.
                                                              (line  27)
* menu item, Sequence > Narrow to Sequence...: Sequences.     (line  30)
* menu item, Sequence > Narrow to Subject Sequence: Limits.   (line  26)
* menu item, Sequence > Narrow to Tick Sequence <1>: Sequences.
                                                              (line  18)
* menu item, Sequence > Narrow to Tick Sequence: Limits.      (line  13)
* menu item, Sequence > Toggle Tick Mark: Sequences.          (line  13)
* menu item, Sequence > Widen from Sequence <1>: Sequences.   (line  40)
* menu item, Sequence > Widen from Sequence: Limits.          (line  33)
* menu, Folder <1>:                      Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* menu, Folder <2>:                      Folders.             (line   6)
* menu, Folder:                          Incorporating Mail.  (line   6)
* menu, Identity <1>:                    Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* menu, Identity:                        Identities.          (line  10)
* menu, Letter <1>:                      Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* menu, Letter:                          Editing Drafts.      (line   6)
* menu, Message <1>:                     Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* menu, Message <2>:                     Sending Mail.        (line  16)
* menu, Message <3>:                     Folders.             (line   6)
* menu, Message:                         Reading Mail.        (line  16)
* menu, Search <1>:                      Searching.           (line   6)
* menu, Search:                          Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* menu, Sequence <1>:                    Sequences.           (line   6)
* menu, Sequence:                        Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* Message > Burst Digest Message menu item: Reading Mail.     (line  67)
* Message > Compose a New Message menu item: Sending Mail.    (line  30)
* Message > Copy Message to Folder... menu item: Folders.     (line  14)
* Message > Delete Message menu item:    Reading Mail.        (line  54)
* Message > Edit Message Again menu item: Sending Mail.       (line  19)
* Message > Execute Delete/Refile menu item: Folders.         (line  71)
* Message > Forward Message... menu item: Sending Mail.       (line  24)
* Message > Go to First Message menu item: Reading Mail.      (line 109)
* Message > Go to Last Message menu item: Reading Mail.       (line 112)
* Message > Go to Message by Number... menu item: Reading Mail.
                                                              (line  70)
* Message > Modify Message menu item:    Reading Mail.        (line 106)
* Message > Next Message menu item:      Reading Mail.        (line 121)
* Message > Pipe Message to Command... menu item: Reading Mail.
                                                              (line  47)
* Message > Previous Message menu item:  Reading Mail.        (line 124)
* Message > Print Message menu item:     Reading Mail.        (line 142)
* Message > Re-edit a Bounced Message menu item: Sending Mail.
                                                              (line  20)
* Message > Redistribute Message... menu item: Sending Mail.  (line  33)
* Message > Refile Message menu item:    Folders.             (line  58)
* Message > Reply to Message... menu item: Sending Mail.      (line  27)
* Message > Show Message menu item:      Reading Mail.        (line  24)
* Message > Show Message with Header menu item: Reading Mail. (line  27)
* Message > Show Message with Preferred Alternative menu item: Reading Mail.
                                                              (line  30)
* Message > Undo Delete/Refile menu item: Folders.            (line  68)
* Message > Unpack Uuencoded Message... menu item: Reading Mail.
                                                              (line 152)
* Message > Write Message to File... menu item: Reading Mail. (line  44)
* message abbreviations:                 Ranges.              (line   6)
* Message menu <1>:                      Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* Message menu <2>:                      Sending Mail.        (line  16)
* Message menu <3>:                      Folders.             (line   6)
* Message menu:                          Reading Mail.        (line  16)
* message numbers:                       Scan Line Formats.   (line  34)
* message ranges:                        Ranges.              (line   6)
* MH book <1>:                           Getting Started.     (line  31)
* MH book:                               Preface.             (line  29)
* MH commands:                           Conventions.         (line  10)
* MH commands, ali:                      Aliases.             (line 117)
* MH commands, burst:                    Digests.             (line  13)
* MH commands, dist:                     Redistributing.      (line   6)
* MH commands, flists:                   Speedbar.            (line  40)
* MH commands, folder:                   Folders.             (line 206)
* MH commands, forw:                     Forwarding.          (line   6)
* MH commands, inc <1>:                  Scan Line Formats.   (line 107)
* MH commands, inc <2>:                  Incorporating Mail.  (line  41)
* MH commands, inc:                      Reading Mail Tour.   (line   6)
* MH commands, install-mh:               Getting Started.     (line  31)
* MH commands, mark:                     Sequences.           (line 125)
* MH commands, mhbuild:                  Adding Attachments.  (line   6)
* MH commands, mhl <1>:                  Replying.            (line   6)
* MH commands, mhl <2>:                  Printing.            (line  35)
* MH commands, mhl:                      Viewing.             (line  89)
* MH commands, mhn <1>:                  Adding Attachments.  (line   6)
* MH commands, mhn:                      Viewing Attachments. (line  72)
* MH commands, mhparam:                  Getting Started.     (line  45)
* MH commands, mhshow:                   Viewing Attachments. (line   6)
* MH commands, mhstore:                  Viewing Attachments. (line  72)
* MH commands, packf:                    Leaving MH-E.        (line  16)
* MH commands, pick <1>:                 Sequences.           (line  68)
* MH commands, pick <2>:                 Limits.              (line  40)
* MH commands, pick:                     Searching.           (line  99)
* MH commands, rcvstore:                 Procmail.            (line  33)
* MH commands, refile <1>:               Folders.             (line 206)
* MH commands, refile:                   Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  51)
* MH commands, repl <1>:                 Replying.            (line  21)
* MH commands, repl:                     Composing.           (line  34)
* MH commands, scan <1>:                 Scan Line Formats.   (line  88)
* MH commands, scan <2>:                 Reading Mail.        (line  16)
* MH commands, scan:                     Reading Mail Tour.   (line   6)
* MH commands, send <1>:                 Sending Message.     (line  16)
* MH commands, send:                     Redistributing.      (line  16)
* MH commands, show:                     Viewing Attachments. (line   6)
* MH commands, slocal:                   Procmail.            (line   6)
* MH commands, sortm:                    Folders.             (line 345)
* MH commands, whom:                     Checking Recipients. (line   6)
* mh customization group:                Options.             (line  33)
* MH FAQ:                                MH FAQ and Support.  (line   6)
* MH profile:                            Getting Started.     (line  39)
* MH profile component:                  Getting Started.     (line  39)
* MH profile component, Aliasfile::      Aliases.             (line 117)
* MH profile component, Draft-Folder::   Getting Started.     (line  69)
* MH profile component, forw::           Forwarding.          (line  14)
* MH profile component, Path::           Getting Started.     (line  39)
* MH profile component, Previous-Sequence: <1>: Sequences.    (line 100)
* MH profile component, Previous-Sequence:: Getting Started.  (line  69)
* MH profile component, repl::           Replying.            (line  30)
* MH profile component, sortm::          Folders.             (line 345)
* MH profile component, Unseen-Sequence: <1>: Procmail.       (line  42)
* MH profile component, Unseen-Sequence: <2>: Sequences.      (line 112)
* MH profile component, Unseen-Sequence:: Getting Started.    (line  69)
* mh-alias customization group:          Aliases.             (line  29)
* MH-E version:                          Miscellaneous.       (line  12)
* MH-E, obtaining:                       Getting MH-E.        (line   6)
* MH-E, versions <1>:                    History.             (line   6)
* MH-E, versions:                        Getting Started.     (line   6)
* MH-E-NEWS:                             Getting MH-E.        (line  24)
* mh-folder customization group:         Folders.             (line  77)
* MH-Folder mode <1>:                    Sequences.           (line  83)
* MH-Folder mode <2>:                    Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* MH-Folder mode <3>:                    Composing.           (line   6)
* MH-Folder mode <4>:                    Folders.             (line 253)
* MH-Folder mode <5>:                    Miscellaneous Commands and Options.
                                                              (line  20)
* MH-Folder mode <6>:                    Navigating.          (line  18)
* MH-Folder mode <7>:                    Reading Mail.        (line   6)
* MH-Folder mode <8>:                    Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  63)
* MH-Folder mode:                        Reading Mail Tour.   (line   6)
* MH-Folder Show mode <1>:               Folders.             (line 253)
* MH-Folder Show mode:                   Digests.             (line  13)
* mh-folder-selection customization group: Folder Selection.  (line  12)
* mh-identity customization group:       Identities.          (line  20)
* mh-inc customization group:            Incorporating Mail.  (line  13)
* mh-junk customization group:           Junk.                (line  30)
* mh-letter customization group:         Editing Drafts.      (line 165)
* MH-Letter mode <1>:                    Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* MH-Letter mode <2>:                    Aliases.             (line  10)
* MH-Letter mode <3>:                    Editing Drafts.      (line   6)
* MH-Letter mode <4>:                    Replying.            (line  30)
* MH-Letter mode <5>:                    Composing.           (line  16)
* MH-Letter mode:                        Sending Mail Tour.   (line   6)
* mh-range customization group:          Ranges.              (line  42)
* mh-scan-line-formats customization group: Scan Line Formats.
                                                              (line  10)
* mh-search customization group:         Searching.           (line  77)
* MH-Search mode <1>:                    Searching.           (line 109)
* MH-Search mode:                        Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* mh-sending-mail customization group:   Sending Mail.        (line  44)
* mh-sequences customization group:      Sequences.           (line  48)
* mh-show customization group:           Reading Mail.        (line 168)
* MH-Show mode <1>:                      Replying.            (line  30)
* MH-Show mode <2>:                      Folders.             (line 260)
* MH-Show mode <3>:                      Viewing.             (line 147)
* MH-Show mode:                          Reading Mail.        (line   6)
* mh-speedbar customization group:       Speedbar.            (line  40)
* mh-thread customization group:         Threading.           (line  41)
* mh-tool-bar customization group:       Tool Bar.            (line   9)
* mhbuild:                               Adding Attachments.  (line   6)
* mhl <1>:                               Replying.            (line   6)
* mhl <2>:                               Printing.            (line  35)
* mhl:                                   Viewing.             (line  89)
* mhl.reply:                             Replying.            (line   6)
* mhn <1>:                               Adding Attachments.  (line   6)
* mhn:                                   Viewing Attachments. (line  72)
* mhparam:                               Getting Started.     (line  45)
* mhshow:                                Viewing Attachments. (line   6)
* mhstore:                               Viewing Attachments. (line  72)
* MIME <1>:                              Adding Attachments.  (line   6)
* MIME:                                  Viewing Attachments. (line   6)
* MIME Meta Language (MML):              Adding Attachments.  (line  21)
* MIME, content description:             Adding Attachments.  (line  44)
* MIME, ftp:                             Adding Attachments.  (line 118)
* MIME, images:                          Adding Attachments.  (line  99)
* MIME, media types:                     Adding Attachments.  (line  27)
* MIME, sound:                           Adding Attachments.  (line  99)
* MIME, tar:                             Adding Attachments.  (line 126)
* MIME, video:                           Adding Attachments.  (line  99)
* minibuffer:                            Conventions.         (line  98)
* mm-decode package:                     Viewing Attachments. (line  11)
* MML:                                   Adding Attachments.  (line  21)
* mode:                                  Sending Mail Tour.   (line   6)
* modes, Mail:                           Composing.           (line  34)
* modes, MH-Folder <1>:                  Sequences.           (line  83)
* modes, MH-Folder <2>:                  Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* modes, MH-Folder <3>:                  Composing.           (line   6)
* modes, MH-Folder <4>:                  Folders.             (line 253)
* modes, MH-Folder <5>:                  Miscellaneous Commands and Options.
                                                              (line  20)
* modes, MH-Folder <6>:                  Navigating.          (line  18)
* modes, MH-Folder <7>:                  Reading Mail.        (line   6)
* modes, MH-Folder <8>:                  Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  63)
* modes, MH-Folder:                      Reading Mail Tour.   (line   6)
* modes, MH-Folder Show <1>:             Folders.             (line 253)
* modes, MH-Folder Show:                 Digests.             (line  13)
* modes, MH-Letter <1>:                  Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* modes, MH-Letter <2>:                  Aliases.             (line  10)
* modes, MH-Letter <3>:                  Editing Drafts.      (line   6)
* modes, MH-Letter <4>:                  Replying.            (line  30)
* modes, MH-Letter <5>:                  Composing.           (line  16)
* modes, MH-Letter:                      Sending Mail Tour.   (line   6)
* modes, MH-Search <1>:                  Searching.           (line 109)
* modes, MH-Search:                      Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* modes, MH-Show <1>:                    Replying.            (line  30)
* modes, MH-Show <2>:                    Folders.             (line 260)
* modes, MH-Show <3>:                    Viewing.             (line 147)
* modes, MH-Show:                        Reading Mail.        (line   6)
* moving between messages <1>:           Folders.             (line 260)
* moving between messages:               Navigating.          (line   6)
* multimedia mail <1>:                   Adding Attachments.  (line   6)
* multimedia mail:                       Viewing Attachments. (line   6)
* multiple personalities:                Identities.          (line   6)
* namazu:                                Searching.           (line 206)
* navigation:                            Navigating.          (line   6)
* new mail:                              Incorporating Mail.  (line  35)
* news:                                  Getting MH-E.        (line  24)
* nil:                                   Options.             (line  15)
* NIS, obtaining local aliases from:     Aliases.             (line 155)
* nmh:                                   Getting Started.     (line  23)
* normal hooks:                          Conventions.         (line  80)
* notations, scan line:                  Scan Line Formats.   (line  78)
* notification of new mail:              Incorporating Mail.  (line  35)
* obtaining MH-E:                        Getting MH-E.        (line   6)
* off, option:                           Options.             (line  15)
* on, option:                            Options.             (line  15)
* online help:                           Using This Manual.   (line   9)
* OpenPGP:                               Reading PGP.         (line   6)
* option, turning on and off:            Options.             (line  15)
* options:                               Conventions.         (line  68)
* Organization: header field:            Identities.          (line  54)
* packf:                                 Leaving MH-E.        (line  16)
* paragraphs, filling:                   Editing Message.     (line  62)
* Path: MH profile component:            Getting Started.     (line  39)
* PGG <1>:                               Sending PGP.         (line  39)
* PGG:                                   Reading PGP.         (line  75)
* pgg customization group <1>:           Sending PGP.         (line  39)
* pgg customization group:               Reading PGP.         (line  75)
* PGP:                                   Reading PGP.         (line   6)
* pick <1>:                              Sequences.           (line  68)
* pick <2>:                              Limits.              (line  40)
* pick:                                  Searching.           (line  99)
* pipes:                                 Files and Pipes.     (line   6)
* point:                                 Conventions.         (line  90)
* preface:                               Preface.             (line   6)
* prefix argument:                       Conventions.         (line  45)
* prefix characters:                     Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  75)
* Previous-Sequence: MH profile component <1>: Sequences.     (line 100)
* Previous-Sequence: MH profile component: Getting Started.   (line  69)
* printing:                              Printing.            (line   6)
* processing mail:                       Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line   6)
* procmail <1>:                          Procmail.            (line   6)
* procmail <2>:                          Searching.           (line 192)
* procmail <3>:                          Folders.             (line 283)
* procmail:                              Incorporating Mail.  (line  57)
* ps-print package:                      Printing.            (line  31)
* quitting <1>:                          Folders.             (line 351)
* quitting <2>:                          Leaving MH-E.        (line   6)
* quitting:                              Conventions.         (line 119)
* ranges:                                Ranges.              (line   6)
* rcvstore:                              Procmail.            (line  33)
* re-editing drafts:                     Editing Again.       (line   6)
* reading mail <1>:                      Miscellaneous Commands and Options.
                                                              (line  35)
* reading mail <2>:                      Reading Mail.        (line   6)
* reading mail:                          Reading Mail Tour.   (line   6)
* README:                                Getting MH-E.        (line  24)
* recipients, checking:                  Checking Recipients. (line   6)
* redistributing:                        Redistributing.      (line   6)
* refile <1>:                            Folders.             (line 206)
* refile:                                Processing Mail Tour.
                                                              (line  51)
* region:                                Conventions.         (line  90)
* regular expressions, mh-alias-apropos: Aliases.             (line 225)
* regular expressions, mh-auto-fields-list: Identities.       (line  90)
* regular expressions, mh-invisible-header-fields: Viewing.   (line  31)
* regular expressions, scan line formats: Scan Line Formats.  (line  95)
* Reid, Brian <1>:                       From Brian Reid.     (line   6)
* Reid, Brian:                           History.             (line   6)
* release notes:                         Getting MH-E.        (line  11)
* renaming folders:                      Folders.             (line 384)
* repl <1>:                              Replying.            (line  21)
* repl:                                  Composing.           (line  34)
* repl: MH profile component:            Replying.            (line  30)
* Reply-To: header field:                Editing Message.     (line   6)
* replying:                              Replying.            (line   6)
* replying to messages:                  Inserting Letter.    (line   6)
* RFC 2047, decoding:                    Scan Line Formats.   (line  74)
* RFC 3156 <1>:                          Sending PGP.         (line   6)
* RFC 3156:                              Reading PGP.         (line   6)
* root, in threads:                      Threading.           (line  12)
* sa-learn:                              Junk.                (line 124)
* saving attachments:                    Viewing Attachments. (line  63)
* scan <1>:                              Scan Line Formats.   (line  88)
* scan <2>:                              Reading Mail.        (line  16)
* scan:                                  Reading Mail Tour.   (line   6)
* scan line formats:                     Scan Line Formats.   (line   6)
* scan line notations:                   Scan Line Formats.   (line  78)
* scan lines:                            Reading Mail.        (line  16)
* Search > Perform Search menu item:     Searching.           (line  13)
* Search > Search with pick menu item:   Searching.           (line  16)
* Search menu <1>:                       Searching.           (line   6)
* Search menu:                           Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* searching:                             Searching.           (line   6)
* security:                              Reading PGP.         (line   6)
* send <1>:                              Sending Message.     (line  16)
* send:                                  Redistributing.      (line  16)
* sending mail <1>:                      Sending Message.     (line   6)
* sending mail <2>:                      Composing.           (line   6)
* sending mail <3>:                      Sending Mail.        (line   6)
* sending mail:                          Sending Mail Tour.   (line   6)
* Sequence > Add Message to Sequence... menu item: Sequences. (line  33)
* Sequence > Delete Message from Sequence... menu item: Sequences.
                                                              (line  21)
* Sequence > Delete Sequence... menu item: Sequences.         (line  24)
* Sequence > List Sequences for Message menu item: Sequences. (line  36)
* Sequence > List Sequences in Folder... menu item: Sequences.
                                                              (line  27)
* Sequence > Narrow to Sequence... menu item: Sequences.      (line  30)
* Sequence > Narrow to Subject Sequence menu item: Limits.    (line  26)
* Sequence > Narrow to Tick Sequence menu item <1>: Sequences.
                                                              (line  18)
* Sequence > Narrow to Tick Sequence menu item: Limits.       (line  13)
* Sequence > Toggle Tick Mark menu item: Sequences.           (line  13)
* Sequence > Widen from Sequence menu item <1>: Sequences.    (line  40)
* Sequence > Widen from Sequence menu item: Limits.           (line  33)
* Sequence menu <1>:                     Sequences.           (line   6)
* Sequence menu:                         Menu Bar.            (line   6)
* sequence, cur:                         Sequences.           (line 100)
* sequence, Previous-Sequence:           Sequences.           (line 100)
* sequence, tick <1>:                    Sequences.           (line  73)
* sequence, tick <2>:                    Limits.              (line  46)
* sequence, tick:                        Folders.             (line 291)
* sequence, unseen:                      Folders.             (line 283)
* sequence, Unseen-Sequence:             Sequences.           (line 112)
* sequences:                             Sequences.           (line   6)
* setting options:                       Options.             (line   6)
* shar:                                  Files and Pipes.     (line  21)
* shell commands:                        Conventions.         (line  10)
* show:                                  Viewing Attachments. (line   6)
* siblings, in threads:                  Threading.           (line  12)
* signature <1>:                         Identities.          (line  66)
* signature:                             Signature.           (line   6)
* signature separator <1>:               Signature.           (line  23)
* signature separator:                   Viewing.             (line 134)
* signed messages:                       Reading PGP.         (line   6)
* signing messages:                      Sending PGP.         (line   6)
* slocal:                                Procmail.            (line   6)
* smileys:                               Viewing.             (line 120)
* sortm:                                 Folders.             (line 345)
* sortm: MH profile component:           Folders.             (line 345)
* sound:                                 Adding Attachments.  (line  99)
* SourceForge <1>:                       History.             (line   6)
* SourceForge <2>:                       Mailing Lists.       (line   6)
* SourceForge:                           Bug Reports.         (line   6)
* spam <1>:                              Junk.                (line   6)
* spam:                                  Folders.             (line 253)
* spam filters, bogofilter:              Junk.                (line  42)
* spam filters, Spamassassin:            Junk.                (line  42)
* spam filters, SpamProbe:               Junk.                (line  42)
* Spamassassin:                          Junk.                (line  42)
* spamc:                                 Junk.                (line  84)
* SpamProbe:                             Junk.                (line  42)
* speedbar:                              Speedbar.            (line   6)
* spell check <1>:                       Sending Message.     (line  12)
* spell check:                           Editing Message.     (line  32)
* starting from command line:            Sending Mail.        (line   9)
* Stephen Gildea <1>:                    From Stephen Gildea. (line   6)
* Stephen Gildea:                        History.             (line   6)
* Subject: header field <1>:             Junk.                (line 242)
* Subject: header field:                 Editing Message.     (line   6)
* supercite package:                     Inserting Letter.    (line  36)
* support:                               MH FAQ and Support.  (line  12)
* swish++:                               Searching.           (line 206)
* swish-e:                               Searching.           (line 206)
* t:                                     Options.             (line  15)
* tar:                                   Adding Attachments.  (line 126)
* terms, Emacs:                          Conventions.         (line   6)
* threading:                             Threading.           (line   6)
* tick sequence <1>:                     Sequences.           (line  73)
* tick sequence <2>:                     Limits.              (line  46)
* tick sequence:                         Folders.             (line 291)
* ticked messages, viewing <1>:          Limits.              (line  46)
* ticked messages, viewing:              Folders.             (line 291)
* ticking messages:                      Sequences.           (line  73)
* To: header field:                      Editing Message.     (line   6)
* tool bar:                              Tool Bar.            (line   6)
* tour:                                  Tour Through MH-E.   (line   6)
* trivial-cite package:                  Inserting Letter.    (line  74)
* tutorial:                              Tour Through MH-E.   (line   6)
* typesetting:                           Viewing.             (line 120)
* uncompface:                            Viewing.             (line  56)
* underline, showing:                    Viewing.             (line 120)
* undo effects of mh-mh-to-mime:         Adding Attachments.  (line 201)
* undo effects of mh-mml-to-mime:        Adding Attachments.  (line 199)
* undoing refiles and deletes:           Folders.             (line 220)
* Unix commands:                         Conventions.         (line  10)
* Unix commands, compface:               Picture.             (line  17)
* Unix commands, convert:                Viewing.             (line  60)
* Unix commands, Emacs <1>:              Conventions.         (line   6)
* Unix commands, Emacs:                  Preface.             (line   6)
* Unix commands, emacsclient:            Incorporating Mail.  (line  72)
* Unix commands, file:                   Adding Attachments.  (line  32)
* Unix commands, ftp:                    Adding Attachments.  (line 118)
* Unix commands, gnuclient:              Incorporating Mail.  (line  72)
* Unix commands, grep:                   Searching.           (line 206)
* Unix commands, index:                  Searching.           (line 244)
* Unix commands, index++:                Searching.           (line 244)
* Unix commands, lpr:                    Printing.            (line  35)
* Unix commands, mairix:                 Searching.           (line 206)
* Unix commands, namazu:                 Searching.           (line 206)
* Unix commands, pick:                   Searching.           (line 206)
* Unix commands, procmail <1>:           Procmail.            (line   6)
* Unix commands, procmail <2>:           Searching.           (line 192)
* Unix commands, procmail <3>:           Folders.             (line 283)
* Unix commands, procmail:               Incorporating Mail.  (line  57)
* Unix commands, shar:                   Files and Pipes.     (line  21)
* Unix commands, swish++:                Searching.           (line 206)
* Unix commands, swish-e:                Searching.           (line 206)
* Unix commands, tar:                    Adding Attachments.  (line 126)
* Unix commands, uncompface:             Viewing.             (line  56)
* Unix commands, uuencode:               Files and Pipes.     (line  21)
* Unix commands, wget:                   Viewing.             (line  60)
* Unix commands, xbuffy:                 Incorporating Mail.  (line  72)
* unseen messages, viewing:              Folders.             (line 283)
* unseen sequence:                       Folders.             (line 283)
* Unseen-Sequence: MH profile component <1>: Procmail.        (line  42)
* Unseen-Sequence: MH profile component <2>: Sequences.       (line 112)
* Unseen-Sequence: MH profile component: Getting Started.     (line  69)
* URLs, highlighting:                    Viewing.             (line 113)
* using folders:                         Folders.             (line   6)
* uuencode:                              Files and Pipes.     (line  21)
* variables:                             Conventions.         (line  65)
* vCard <1>:                             Signature.           (line   9)
* vCard:                                 Viewing.             (line 134)
* version:                               Miscellaneous.       (line  12)
* versions of MH-E <1>:                  History.             (line   6)
* versions of MH-E:                      Getting Started.     (line   6)
* video:                                 Adding Attachments.  (line  99)
* viewing attachments:                   Viewing Attachments. (line  37)
* viruses:                               Junk.                (line  11)
* w3:                                    HTML.                (line  67)
* w3m:                                   HTML.                (line  30)
* w3m-standalone:                        HTML.                (line  37)
* wget:                                  Viewing.             (line  60)
* whitelisting:                          Junk.                (line  11)
* whom:                                  Checking Recipients. (line   6)
* Wohler, Bill <1>:                      From Bill Wohler.    (line   6)
* Wohler, Bill <2>:                      History.             (line   6)
* Wohler, Bill:                          Preface.             (line  40)
* worms:                                 Junk.                (line  11)
* X-Bogosity: header field:              Junk.                (line 177)
* x-face package:                        Viewing.             (line  56)
* X-Face: header field <1>:              Picture.             (line  12)
* X-Face: header field:                  Viewing.             (line  44)
* X-Image-URL: header field <1>:         Picture.             (line  12)
* X-Image-URL: header field:             Viewing.             (line  44)
* X-Mailer: header field:                Composing.           (line  29)
* X-MHE-Checksum: header field:          Searching.           (line 192)
* X-Spam-Level: header field:            Junk.                (line  84)
* X-Spam-Status: header field:           Junk.                (line  84)
* X-SpamProbe: header field:             Junk.                (line 215)
* xbuffy:                                Incorporating Mail.  (line  72)
* xmh, in MH-E history:                  From Jim Larus.      (line  31)
* yanking messages:                      Inserting Letter.    (line   6)
* ypcat passwd:                          Aliases.             (line 155)
* ~:                                     Conventions.         (line 113)


