The following files in this directory are derived from the Unicode
Data File at http://www.unicode.org/Public/UNIDATA/UnicodeData.txt,
downloaded on 2006-05-23:

  charprop.el uni-bidi.el uni-category.el uni-combining.el
  uni-comment.el uni-decimal.el uni-decomposition.el uni-digit.el
  uni-lowercase.el uni-mirrored.el uni-name.el uni-numeric.el
  uni-old-name.el uni-titlecase.el uni-uppercase.el

These files were generated from UnicodeData.txt using unidata-gen.el,
which is not included in the Emacs distribution; it can be found in
the admin/unidata directory of the Emacs source repository at
https://savannah.gnu.org/projects/emacs/

The file UnicodeData.txt is used under the terms of the following
Copyright and Permission Notice:


Copyright (C) 1991-2009 Unicode, Inc. All rights reserved. Distributed
under the Terms of Use in http://www.unicode.org/copyright.html.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of the Unicode data files and any associated documentation (the
"Data Files") or Unicode software and any associated documentation
(the "Software") to deal in the Data Files or Software without
restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy,
modify, merge, publish, distribute, and/or sell copies of the Data
Files or Software, and to permit persons to whom the Data Files or
Software are furnished to do so, provided that (a) the above copyright
notice(s) and this permission notice appear with all copies of the
Data Files or Software, (b) both the above copyright notice(s) and
this permission notice appear in associated documentation, and (c)
there is clear notice in each modified Data File or in the Software as
well as in the documentation associated with the Data File(s) or
Software that the data or software has been modified.

THE DATA FILES AND SOFTWARE ARE PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF
ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
NONINFRINGEMENT OF THIRD PARTY RIGHTS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
HOLDER OR HOLDERS INCLUDED IN THIS NOTICE BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, OR
ANY SPECIAL INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES, OR ANY DAMAGES
WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT
OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THE DATA FILES OR
SOFTWARE.

Except as contained in this notice, the name of a copyright holder
shall not be used in advertising or otherwise to promote the sale, use
or other dealings in these Data Files or Software without prior
written authorization of the copyright holder.
