@c -*- coding: iso-latin-1 -*-
@c This is part of the Emacs manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1994-1997, 1999-2012 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See file emacs.texi for copying conditions.
@c
@node Acknowledgments, Screen, Concept Index, Top
@unnumbered Acknowledgments

Many people have contributed code included in the Free Software
Foundation's distribution of GNU Emacs.  To show our appreciation for
their public spirit, we list here in alphabetical order those who have
written substantial portions.  Others too numerous to mention have
reported and fixed bugs, and added features to many parts of Emacs.
We thank them for their generosity as well.

This list is intended to mention every contributor of a major package or
feature we currently distribute; if you know of someone we have omitted,
please report that as a manual bug.  More comprehensive information is
available in the @file{ChangeLog} files, summarized in the file
@file{etc/AUTHORS} in the distribution.

@c We should list here anyone who has contributed a new package,
@c and anyone who has made major enhancements in Emacs
@c that many users would notice and consider important.
@c Remove things that are no longer distributed.
@c Note this file is only used ifnottex; otherwise a shorter version in
@c emacs.texi is used.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Per Abrahamsen wrote the customization facilities, as well as
@file{double.el}, for typing accented characters not normally available
from the keyboard; @file{xt-mouse.el}, which allows mouse commands
through Xterm; @file{gnus-cus.el}, which implements customization
commands for Gnus; @file{gnus-cite.el}, a citation-parsing facility for
news articles; @file{gnus-score.el}, scoring for Gnus; @file{cpp.el},
which hides or highlights parts of C programs according to preprocessor
conditionals; and the widget library files @file{wid-browse.el},
@file{wid-edit.el}, @file{widget.el}.  He also co-wrote
@file{gnus-soup.el}.

@item
Tomas Abrahamsson wrote @file{artist.el}, a package for producing
@acronym{ASCII} art with a mouse or with keyboard keys.

@item
Jay K.@: Adams wrote @file{jka-compr.el} and @file{jka-cmpr-hook.el},
providing automatic decompression and recompression for compressed
files.

@item
Michael Albinus wrote @file{dbus.el}, a package that implements the
D-Bus message bus protocol; @file{zeroconf.el}, a mode for browsing
Avahi services; @file{xesam.el}, a Xesam-based search engine
interface; and @file{secrets.el}, an interface to keyring daemons for
storing confidential data.  He and Kai Großjohann wrote the Tramp package, which
provides transparent remote file editing using rcp, ssh, ftp, and
other network protocols.  He and Daniel Pittman wrote
@file{tramp-cache.el}.

@item
Ralf Angeli wrote @file{scroll-lock.el}, a minor mode which keeps the
point vertically fixed by scrolling the window when moving up and down
in the buffer.

@item
Joe Arceneaux wrote the original text property implementation, and
implemented support for X11.

@item
Emil Åström, Milan Zamaza, and Stefan Bruda wrote @file{prolog.el},
a mode for editing Prolog (and Mercury) code.

@item
Miles Bader wrote @file{image-file.el}, support code for visiting image
files; @file{minibuf-eldef.el}, a minor mode that hides the minibuffer
default value when appropriate; @file{rfn-eshadow.el}, shadowing of
@code{read-file-name} input; @file{mb-depth.el}, display of minibuffer
depth; @file{button.el}, the library that implements clickable buttons;
@file{face-remap.el}, a package for changing the default face in
individual buffers; and @file{macroexp.el} for macro-expansion.  He
also worked on an early version of the lexical binding code.

@item
David Bakhash wrote @file{strokes.el}, a mode for controlling Emacs by
moving the mouse in particular patterns.

@item
Juanma Barranquero wrote @file{emacs-lock.el} (based on the original
version by Tom Wurgler), which makes it harder to exit with valuable
buffers unsaved.  He also made many other contributions to other
areas, including MS Windows support.

@item
Eli Barzilay wrote @file{calculator.el}, a desktop calculator for
Emacs.

@item
Steven L.@: Baur wrote @file{footnote.el} which lets you include
footnotes in email messages; and @file{gnus-audio.el} and
@file{earcon.el}, which provide sound effects for Gnus.  He also wrote
@file{gnus-setup.el}.

@item
Alexander L.@: Belikoff, Sergey Berezin, Sacha Chua, David Edmondson,
Noah Friedman, Andreas Fuchs, Mario Lang, Ben Mesander, Lawrence
Mitchell, Gergely Nagy, Michael Olson, Per Persson, Jorgen Schaefer,
Alex Schroeder, and Tom Tromey wrote ERC, an advanced Internet Relay
Chat client (for more information, see the file @file{CREDITS} in the
ERC distribution).

@item
Scott Bender, Michael Brouwer, Christophe de Dinechin, Carl Edman,
Christian Limpach and Adrian Robert developed and maintained the
NeXTstep port of Emacs.

@item
Anna M.@: Bigatti wrote @file{cal-html.el}, which produces HTML calendars.

@item
Ray Blaak and Simon South wrote @file{delphi.el}, a mode for editing
Delphi (Object Pascal) source code.

@item
Martin Blais, Stefan Merten, and David Goodger wrote @file{rst.el}, a
mode for editing reStructuredText documents.

@item
Jim Blandy wrote Emacs 19's input system, brought its configuration and
build process up to the GNU coding standards, and contributed to the
frame support and multi-face support.  Jim also wrote @file{tvi970.el},
terminal support for the TeleVideo 970 terminals; and co-wrote
@file{wyse50.el} (q.v.@:).

@item
Per Bothner wrote @file{term.el}, a terminal emulator in an Emacs
buffer.

@item
Terrence M.@: Brannon wrote @file{landmark.el}, a neural-network robot
that learns landmarks.

@item
Frank Bresz wrote @file{diff.el}, a program to display @code{diff}
output.

@item
Peter Breton implemented @file{dirtrack.el}, a library for tracking
directory changes in shell buffers; @file{filecache.el}, which records
which directories your files are in; @file{locate.el}, which
interfaces to the @code{locate} command; @file{find-lisp.el}, an Emacs
Lisp emulation of the @command{find} program; @file{net-utils.el}; and
the ``generic mode'' feature.

@item
Emmanuel Briot wrote @file{xml.el}, an XML parser for Emacs; and
@file{ada-prj.el}, editing of Ada mode project files, as well as
co-authoring @file{ada-mode.el} and @file{ada-xref.el}.

@item
Kevin Broadey wrote @file{foldout.el}, providing folding extensions to
Emacs's outline modes.

@item
David M.@: Brown wrote @file{array.el}, for editing arrays and other
tabular data.

@item
W@l{}odek Bzyl and Ryszard Kubiak wrote @file{ogonek.el}, a package for
changing the encoding of Polish characters.

@item
Bill Carpenter provided @file{feedmail.el}, a package for massaging
outgoing mail messages and sending them through various popular mailers.

@item
Per Cederqvist and Inge Wallin wrote @file{ewoc.el}, an Emacs widget for
manipulating object collections.  Per Cederqvist, Inge Wallin, and
Thomas Bellman wrote @file{avl-tree.el}, for balanced binary trees.

@item
Hans Chalupsky wrote @file{advice.el}, an overloading mechanism for
Emacs Lisp functions; and @file{trace.el}, a tracing facility for Emacs
Lisp.

@item
Chris Chase, Carsten Dominik, and J.@: D.@: Smith wrote IDLWAVE mode,
for editing IDL and WAVE CL.

@item
Bob Chassell wrote @file{texnfo-upd.el}, @file{texinfo.el}, and
@file{makeinfo.el}, modes and utilities for working with Texinfo files;
and @file{page-ext.el}, commands for extended page handling.  He also
wrote the ``Introduction to programming in Emacs Lisp'' manual.

@item
Jihyun Cho wrote @file{hanja-util.el} and @file{hangul.el}, utilities
for Korean Hanja.

@item
Andrew Choi and Yamamoto Mitsuharu wrote the Carbon support, used
prior to Emacs 23 for Mac OS.

@item
Chong Yidong was the Emacs co-maintainer from Emacs 23 onwards.  He made many
improvements to the Emacs display engine.  He also wrote
@file{tabulated-list.el}, a generic major mode for lists of data;
and improved support for themes and packages.

@item
James Clark wrote SGML mode, a mode for editing SGML documents; and
nXML mode, a mode for editing XML documents.  He also contributed to
Emacs's dumping procedures.

@item
Mike Clarkson wrote @file{edt.el}, an emulation of DEC's EDT editor.

@item
Glynn Clements provided @file{gamegrid.el} and a couple of games that
use it, Snake and Tetris.

@item
Andrew Cohen wrote @file{spam-wash.el}, to decode and clean email before
it is analyzed for spam.

@item
Edward O'Connor wrote @file{json.el}, a file for parsing and
generating JSON files.

@item
Georges Brun-Cottan and Stefan Monnier wrote @file{easy-mmode.el}, a
package for easy definition of major and minor modes.

@item
Andrew Csillag wrote M4 mode (@file{m4-mode.el}).

@item
Doug Cutting and Jamie Zawinski wrote @file{disass.el}, a disassembler
for compiled Emacs Lisp code.

@item
Mathias Dahl wrote @file{image-dired.el}, a package for viewing image
files as ``thumbnails''.

@item
Julien Danjou wrote an implementation of ``Desktop Notifications''
(@file{notifications.el}); and @file{color.el}, a library for general
color manipulation.  He also made various contributions to Gnus.

@item
Vivek Dasmohapatra wrote @file{htmlfontify.el}, to convert a buffer or
source tree to HTML.

@item
Gary Delp wrote @file{mailpost.el}, an interface between RMAIL and the
@file{/usr/uci/post} mailer.

@item
Matthieu Devin wrote @file{delsel.el}, a package to make newly-typed
text replace the current selection.

@item
Eric Ding wrote @file{goto-addr.el},

@item
Jan Djärv added support for the GTK+ toolkit and X drag-and-drop.
He also wrote @file{dynamic-setting.el}.

@item
Carsten Dominik wrote Ref@TeX{}, a package for setting up labels and
cross-references in La@TeX{} documents; and co-wrote IDLWAVE mode
(q.v.@:).  He was the original author of Org mode, for maintaining notes,
todo lists, and project planning.  Bastien Guerry subsequently took
over maintainership.  Benjamin Andresen, Thomas Baumann, Joel Boehland, Jan Böcker, Lennart
Borgman, Baoqiu Cui, Dan Davison, Christian Egli, Eric S.@: Fraga, Daniel German, Chris Gray, Konrad Hinsen, Tassilo Horn, Philip
Jackson, Martyn Jago, Thorsten Jolitz, Jambunathan K, Tokuya Kameshima, Sergey Litvinov, David Maus, Ross Patterson, Juan Pechiar, Sebastian Rose, Eric Schulte,
Paul Sexton, Ulf Stegemann, Andy Stewart, Christopher Suckling, David O'Toole, John Wiegley, Zhang Weize,
Piotr Zielinski, and others also wrote various Org mode components.
For more information, @pxref{History and Acknowledgments,,, org, The Org Manual}.

@item
Scott Draves wrote @file{tq.el}, help functions for maintaining
transaction queues between Emacs and its subprocesses.

@item
Benjamin Drieu wrote @file{pong.el}, an implementation of the classical
pong game.

@item
Viktor Dukhovni wrote support for dumping under SunOS version 4.

@item
John Eaton and Kurt Hornik wrote Octave mode.

@item
Rolf Ebert, Markus Heritsch, and Emmanuel Briot wrote Ada mode.

@item
Paul Eggert integrated the Gnulib portability library, and made many
other portability fixes to the C code; as well as his contributions
to VC and the calendar.

@item
Stephen Eglen wrote @file{mspools.el}, which tells you which Procmail
folders have mail waiting in them; and @file{iswitchb.el}, a feature
for incremental reading and completion of buffer names.

@item
Torbjörn Einarsson wrote @file{f90.el}, a mode for Fortran 90 files.

@item
Tsugutomo Enami co-wrote the support for international character sets.

@item
David Engster wrote @file{mairix.el} and @file{nnmairix.el}, an
interface to the Mairix indexing tool.

@item
Hans Henrik Eriksen wrote @file{simula.el}, a mode for editing SIMULA 87
code.

@item
Michael Ernst wrote @file{reposition.el}, a command for recentering a
function's source code and preceding comment on the screen.

@item
Ata Etemadi wrote @file{cdl.el}, functions for working with Common Data
Language source code.

@item
Frederick Farnbach implemented @file{morse.el}, which converts text to
Morse code.

@item
Oscar Figueiredo wrote EUDC, the Emacs Unified Directory Client, which
is an interface to directory servers via LDAP, CCSO PH/QI, or BBDB; and
@file{ldap.el}, the LDAP client interface.

@item
Fred Fish wrote the support for dumping COFF executable files.

@item
Karl Fogel wrote @file{bookmark.el}, which implements named
placeholders; @file{mail-hist.el}, a history mechanism for outgoing
mail messages; and @file{saveplace.el}, for preserving point's
location in files between editing sessions.

@item
Gary Foster wrote @file{crisp.el}, the emulation for CRiSP and Brief
editors; and @file{scroll-all.el}, a mode for scrolling several buffers
together.

@item
Noah Friedman wrote @file{rlogin.el}, an interface to Rlogin,
@file{type-break.el}, which reminds you to take periodic breaks from
typing, and @code{eldoc-mode}, a mode to show the defined parameters or
the doc string for the Lisp function near point.

@item
Shigeru Fukaya wrote a testsuite for the byte-compiler.

@item
Keith Gabryelski wrote @file{hexl.el}, a mode for editing binary files.

@item
Kevin Gallagher rewrote and enhanced the EDT emulation, and wrote
@file{flow-ctrl.el}, a package for coping with unsuppressible XON/XOFF
flow control.

@item
Kevin Gallo added multiple-frame support for Windows NT and wrote
@file{w32-win.el}, support functions for the MS-Windows window system.

@item
Juan León Lahoz García wrote @file{wdired.el}, a package for
performing file operations by directly editing Dired buffers.

@item
Howard Gayle wrote much of the C and Lisp code for display tables and
case tables.  He also wrote @file{rot13.el}, a command to display the
plain-text form of a buffer encoded with the Caesar cipher;
@file{vt100-led.el}, a package for controlling the LEDs on
VT100-compatible terminals; and much of the support for ISO-8859
European character sets (which includes @file{iso-ascii.el},
@file{iso-insert.el}, @file{iso-swed.el},
@file{iso-syntax.el}, @file{iso-transl.el}, and @file{swedish.el}).

@item
Stephen Gildea made the Emacs quick reference card, and made many
contributions for @file{time-stamp.el}, a package for maintaining
last-change time stamps in files.

@item
Julien Gilles wrote @file{gnus-ml.el}, a mailing list minor mode for
Gnus.

@item
David Gillespie wrote the Common Lisp compatibility packages;
@code{Calc}, an advanced calculator and mathematical tool, since
maintained and developed by Jay Belanger; @file{complete.el}, a partial
completion mechanism; and @file{edmacro.el}, a package for editing
keyboard macros.

@item
Bob Glickstein wrote @file{sregex.el}, a facility for writing regexps
using a Lisp-like syntax.

@item
Boris Goldowsky wrote @file{avoid.el}, a package to keep the mouse
cursor out of the way of the text cursor; @file{shadowfile.el}, a
package for keeping identical copies of files in more than one place;
@file{format.el}, a package for reading and writing files in various
formats; @file{enriched.el}, a package for saving text properties in
files; @file{facemenu.el}, a package for specifying faces; and
@file{descr-text.el}, describing text and character properties.

@item
Michelangelo Grigni wrote @file{ffap.el} which visits a file,
taking the file name from the buffer.

@item
Odd Gripenstam wrote @file{dcl-mode.el} for editing DCL command files.

@item
Michael Gschwind wrote @file{iso-cvt.el}, a package to convert between
the ISO 8859-1 character set and the notations for non-@acronym{ASCII}
characters used by @TeX{} and net tradition.

@item
Bastien Guerry wrote @file{gnus-bookmark.el}, bookmark support for Gnus;
as well as helping to maintain Org mode (q.v.@:).

@item
Henry Guillaume wrote @file{find-file.el}, a package to visit files
related to the currently visited file.

@item
Doug Gwyn wrote the portable @code{alloca} implementation.

@item
Ken'ichi Handa implemented most of the support for international
character sets, and wrote most of the Emacs 23 font handling code.  He
also wrote @file{composite.el}, which provides a minor mode that
composes characters automatically when they are displayed;
@file{isearch-x.el}, a facility for searching non-@acronym{ASCII}
text; and @file{ps-bdf.el}, a BDF font support for printing
non-@acronym{ASCII} text on a PostScript printer.  Together with Naoto
Takahashi, he wrote @file{quail.el}, an input facility for typing
non-@acronym{ASCII} text from an @acronym{ASCII} keyboard.

@item
Jesper Harder wrote @file{yenc.el}, for decoding yenc encoded messages.

@item
Alexandru Harsanyi wrote a library for accessing SOAP web services.

@item
K.@: Shane Hartman wrote @file{chistory.el} and @file{echistory.el},
packages for browsing command history lists; @file{electric.el} and
@file{helper.el}, which provide an alternative command loop and
appropriate help facilities; @file{emacsbug.el}, a package for
reporting Emacs bugs; @file{picture.el}, a mode for editing
@acronym{ASCII} pictures; and @file{view.el}, a package for perusing
files and buffers without editing them.

@item
John Heidemann wrote @file{mouse-copy.el} and @file{mouse-drag.el},
which provide alternative mouse-based editing and scrolling features.

@item
Jon K Hellan wrote @file{utf7.el}, support for mail-safe transformation
format of Unicode.

@item
Karl Heuer wrote the original blessmail script, implemented the
@code{intangible} text property, and rearranged the structure of the
@code{Lisp_Object} type to allow for more data bits.

@item
Manabu Higashida ported Emacs to MS-DOS.

@item
Anders Holst wrote @file{hippie-exp.el}, a versatile completion and
expansion package.

@item
Tassilo Horn wrote DocView mode, allowing viewing of PDF, PostScript and
DVI documents.

@item
Tom Houlder wrote @file{mantemp.el}, which generates manual C@t{++}
template instantiations.

@item
Joakim Hove wrote @file{html2text.el}, a html to plain text converter.

@item
Denis Howe wrote @file{browse-url.el}, a package for invoking a WWW
browser to display a URL.

@item
Lars Magne Ingebrigtsen did a major redesign of the Gnus news-reader and
wrote many of its parts.  Several of these are now general components of
Emacs, including: @file{dns.el} for Domain Name Service lookups;
@file{format-spec.el} for formatting arbitrary format strings;
@file{netrc.el} for parsing of @file{.netrc} files; and
@file{time-date.el} for general date and time handling.
He also wrote @file{network-stream.el}, for opening network processes;
@file{url-queue.el}, for controlling parallel downloads of URLs;
and implemented libxml2 support.
Components of Gnus have also been written by: Nagy Andras, David
Blacka, Scott Byer, Ludovic Courtès, Julien Danjou, Kevin Greiner, Kai
Großjohann, Joe Hildebrand, Paul Jarc, Simon Josefsson, Sascha
Lüdecke, David Moore, Jim Radford, Benjamin Rutt, Raymond Scholz,
Thomas Steffen, Reiner Steib, Didier Verna, Ilja Weis, Katsumi
Yamaoka, Teodor Zlatanov, and others (@pxref{Contributors,,,gnus, the
Gnus Manual}).

@item
Andrew Innes contributed extensively to the MS-Windows support.

@item
Seiichiro Inoue improved Emacs's XIM support.

@item
Philip Jackson wrote @file{find-cmd.el}, to build a @code{find}
command-line.

@item
Ulf Jasper wrote @file{icalendar.el}, a package for converting Emacs
diary entries to and from the iCalendar format;
@file{newsticker.el}, an RSS and Atom based Newsticker; and
@file{bubbles.el}, a puzzle game.

@item
Kyle Jones wrote @file{life.el}, a package to play Conway's ``life'' game.

@item
Terry Jones wrote @file{shadow.el}, a package for finding potential
load-path problems when some Lisp file ``shadows'' another.

@item
Simon Josefsson wrote @file{dns-mode.el}, an editing mode for Domain
Name System master files; @file{dig.el}, a Domain Name System interface;
@file{flow-fill.el}, a package for interpreting RFC2646 formatted text
in messages; @file{fringe.el}, a package for customizing the fringe;
@file{imap.el}, an Emacs Lisp library for talking to IMAP servers;
@file{password-cache.el}, a password reader; @file{nnimap.el}, the IMAP
back-end for Gnus; @file{url-imap.el} for the URL library;
@file{rfc2104.el}, a hashed message authentication facility; the Gnus
S/MIME and Sieve components; and @file{tls.el} and @file{starttls.el}
for the Transport Layer Security protocol.

@item
Arne Jørgensen wrote @file{latexenc.el}, a package to
automatically guess the correct coding system in La@TeX{} files.

@item
Alexandre Julliard wrote @file{vc-git.el}, support for the Git version
control system.

@item
Tomoji Kagatani implemented @file{smtpmail.el}, used for sending out
mail with SMTP.

@item
Ivan Kanis wrote @file{vc-hg.el}, support for the Mercurial version
control system.

@item
Henry Kautz wrote @file{bib-mode.el}, a mode for maintaining
bibliography databases compatible with @code{refer} (the @code{troff}
version) and @code{lookbib}, and @file{refbib.el}, a package to convert
those databases to the format used by the La@TeX{} text formatting package.

@item
Taichi Kawabata added support for Devanagari script and the Indian
languages, and wrote @file{ucs-normalize.el} for Unicode normalization.

@item
Taro Kawagishi implemented the MD4 Message Digest Algorithm in Lisp; and
wrote @file{ntlm.el} and @file{sasl-ntlm.el} for NT LanManager
authentication support.

@item
Howard Kaye wrote @file{sort.el}, commands to sort text in Emacs
buffers.

@item
Michael Kifer wrote @code{ediff}, an interactive interface to the
@command{diff}, @command{patch}, and @command{merge} programs; and
Viper, another emulator of the VI editor.

@item
Richard King wrote the first version of @file{userlock.el} and
@file{filelock.c}, which provide simple support for multiple users
editing the same file.  He also wrote the initial version of
@file{uniquify.el}, a facility to make buffer names unique by adding
parts of the file's name to the buffer name.

@item
Peter Kleiweg wrote @file{ps-mode.el}, a mode for editing PostScript
files and running a PostScript interpreter interactively from within
Emacs.

@item
Karel Klí@v{c} contributed SELinux support, for preserving the
Security-Enhanced Linux context of files on backup and copy.

@item
Shuhei Kobayashi wrote @file{hex-util.el}, for operating on hexadecimal
strings; and support for HMAC (Keyed-Hashing for Message Authentication).

@item
Pavel Kobyakov wrote @file{flymake.el}, a minor mode for performing
on-the-fly syntax checking.

@item
David M.@: Koppelman wrote @file{hi-lock.el}, a minor mode for
interactive automatic highlighting of parts of the buffer text.

@item
Koseki Yoshinori wrote @file{iimage.el}, a minor mode for displaying
inline images.

@item
Robert Krawitz wrote the original @file{xmenu.c}, part of Emacs's pop-up
menu support.

@item
Sebastian Kremer wrote @code{dired-mode}, with contributions by Lawrence
R.@: Dodd.  He also wrote @file{ls-lisp.el}, a Lisp emulation of the
@code{ls} command for platforms that don't have @code{ls} as a standard
program.

@item
David K@ringaccent{a}gedal wrote @file{tempo.el}, providing support for
easy insertion of boilerplate text and other common constructions.

@item
Igor Kuzmin wrote @file{cconv.el}, providing closure conversion for
statically scoped Emacs lisp.

@item
Daniel LaLiberte wrote @file{edebug.el}, a source-level debugger for
Emacs Lisp; @file{cl-specs.el}, specifications to help @code{edebug}
debug code written using David Gillespie's Common Lisp support;
@file{cust-print.el}, a customizable package for printing lisp
objects; and @file{isearch.el}, Emacs's incremental search minor mode.
He also co-wrote @file{hideif.el} (q.v.@:).

@item
Karl Landstrom and Daniel Colascione wrote @file{js.el}, a mode for
editing JavaScript.

@item
Vinicius Jose Latorre wrote the Emacs printing facilities, as well as
@code{ps-print} (with Jim Thompson, Jacques Duthen, and Kenichi Handa),
a package for pretty-printing Emacs buffers to PostScript printers;
@file{delim-col.el}, a package to arrange text into columns;
@file{ebnf2ps.el}, a package that translates EBNF grammar to a syntactic
chart that can be printed to a PostScript printer; and
@file{whitespace.el}, a package that detects and cleans up excess
whitespace in a file (building on an earlier version by Rajesh Vaidheeswarran).

@item
Frederic Lepied wrote @file{expand.el}, which uses the abbrev
mechanism for inserting programming constructs.

@item
Peter Liljenberg wrote @file{elint.el}, a Lint-style code checker for
Emacs Lisp programs.

@item
Lars Lindberg wrote @file{msb.el}, which provides more flexible menus
for buffer selection; co-wrote @file{imenu.el} (q.v.@:); and rewrote
@file{dabbrev.el}, originally written by Don Morrison.

@item
Anders Lindgren wrote @file{autorevert.el}, a package for automatically
reverting files visited by Emacs that were changed on disk;
@file{cwarn.el}, a package to highlight suspicious C and C@t{++}
constructs; and @file{follow.el}, a minor mode to synchronize windows
that show the same buffer.

@item
Thomas Link wrote @file{filesets.el}, a package for handling sets of
files.

@item
Juri Linkov wrote @file{misearch.el}, extending isearch to multi-buffer
searches; the code in @file{files-x.el} for handling file- and
directory-local variables; and the @code{info-finder} feature that
creates a virtual Info manual of package keywords.

@item
Károly L@H{o}rentey wrote the ``multi-terminal'' code, which allows
Emacs to run on graphical and text terminals simultaneously.

@item
Martin Lorentzon wrote @file{vc-annotate.el}, support for version
control annotation.

@item
Dave Love wrote much of the code dealing with Unicode support and
Latin-N unification.  He added support for many coding systems,
including the various UTF-7 and UTF-16 coding systems.  He also wrote
@code{autoarg-mode}, a global minor mode whereby digit keys supply
prefix arguments; @code{autoarg-kp-mode}, which redefines the keypad
numeric keys to digit arguments; @file{autoconf.el}, a mode for editing
Autoconf files; @file{cfengine.el}, a mode for editing Cfengine files;
@file{elide-head.el}, a package for eliding boilerplate text from file
headers; @file{hl-line.el}, a minor mode for highlighting the line in
the current window on which point is; @file{cap-words.el}, a minor mode
for motion in ``CapitalizedWordIdentifiers''; @file{latin1-disp.el}, a
package that lets you display ISO 8859 characters on Latin-1 terminals
by setting up appropriate display tables; @file{python.el}, a major mode
for the Python programming language; @file{smiley.el}, a facility for
displaying smiley faces; @file{sym-comp.el}, a library for performing
mode-dependent symbol completion; @file{benchmark.el} for timing code
execution; and @file{tool-bar.el}, a mode to control the display of
the Emacs tool bar.  With Riccardo Murri he wrote @file{vc-bzr.el},
support for the Bazaar version control system.

@item
Eric Ludlam wrote the Speedbar package; @file{checkdoc.el}, for checking
doc strings in Emacs Lisp programs; @file{dframe.el}, providing
dedicated frame support modes; @file{ezimage.el}, a generalized way to
place images over text; @file{chart.el} for drawing bar charts etc; and
the EIEIO (Enhanced Implementation of Emacs Interpreted Objects)
package.  He was also the main author of the CEDET (Collection of Emacs
Development Environment Tools) package.  Portions were also written by
Jan Moringen, David Ponce, and Joakim Verona.

@item
Roland McGrath wrote @file{compile.el} (since updated by Daniel
Pfeiffer), a package for running compilations in a buffer, and then
visiting the locations reported in error messages; @file{etags.el}, a
package for jumping to function definitions and searching or replacing
in all the files mentioned in a @file{TAGS} file; with Sebastian
Kremer @file{find-dired.el}, for using @code{dired} commands on output
from the @code{find} program; @file{grep.el} for running the
@code{grep} command; @file{map-ynp.el}, a general purpose boolean
question-asker; @file{autoload.el}, providing semi-automatic
maintenance of autoload files.

@item
Alan Mackenzie wrote the integrated AWK support in CC Mode, and
maintained CC Mode from Emacs 22 onwards.

@item
Michael McNamara and Wilson Snyder wrote Verilog mode.

@item
Christopher J.@: Madsen wrote @file{decipher.el}, a package for cracking
simple substitution ciphers.

@item
Neil M.@: Mager wrote @file{appt.el}, functions to notify users of their
appointments.  It finds appointments recorded in the diary files
used by the @code{calendar} package.

@item
Ken Manheimer wrote @file{allout.el}, a mode for manipulating and
formatting outlines, and @file{icomplete.el}, which provides incremental
completion feedback in the minibuffer.

@item
Bill Mann wrote @file{perl-mode.el}, a mode for editing Perl code.

@item
Brian Marick and Daniel LaLiberte wrote @file{hideif.el}, support for
hiding selected code within C @code{#ifdef} clauses.

@item
Simon Marshall wrote @file{regexp-opt.el}, which generates a regular
expression from a list of strings; and the fast-lock and lazy-lock
font-lock support modes.  He also extended @file{comint.el} and
@file{shell.el}, originally written by Olin Shivers.

@item
Bengt Martensson, Dirk Herrmann, Marc Shapiro, Mike Newton, Aaron Larson,
and Stefan Schoef, wrote @file{bibtex.el}, a mode for editing Bib@TeX{}
bibliography files.

@item
Charlie Martin wrote @file{autoinsert.el}, which provides automatic
mode-sensitive insertion of text into new files.

@item
Yukihiro Matsumoto and Nobuyoshi Nakada wrote Ruby-mode.

@item
Thomas May wrote @file{blackbox.el}, a version of the traditional
blackbox game.

@item
David Megginson wrote @file{derived.el}, which allows one to define new
major modes by inheriting key bindings and commands from existing major
modes.

@item
Will Mengarini wrote @file{repeat.el}, a command to repeat the preceding
command with its arguments.

@item
Richard Mlynarik wrote @file{cl-indent.el}, a package for indenting
Common Lisp code; @file{ebuff-menu.el}, an ``electric'' browser for
buffer listings; @file{ehelp.el}, bindings for browsing help screens;
@file{rfc822.el}, a parser for E-mail addresses in the RFC-822 format,
used in mail messages and news articles; @file{terminal.el}, a
terminal emulator for Emacs subprocesses; and @file{yow.el}, an
essential utility.

@item
Gerd Moellmann was the Emacs maintainer from the beginning of Emacs 21
development until the release of 21.1.  He wrote the new display
engine used from Emacs 21 onwards, and the asynchronous timers
facility.  He also wrote @code{ebrowse}, the C@t{++} browser;
@file{jit-lock.el}, the Just-In-Time font-lock support mode;
@file{tooltip.el}, a package for displaying tooltips;
@file{authors.el}, a package for maintaining the @file{AUTHORS} file;
and @file{rx.el}, a regular expression constructor.

@item
Stefan Monnier was the Emacs co-maintainer from Emacs 23 onwards.  He added
support for Arch and Subversion to VC, re-wrote much of the Emacs server
to use the built-in networking primitives, and re-wrote the abbrev and
minibuffer completion code for Emacs 23.  He also wrote @code{PCL-CVS},
a directory-level front end to the CVS version control system;
@file{reveal.el}, a minor mode for automatically revealing invisible
text; @file{smerge-mode.el}, a minor mode for resolving @code{diff3}
conflicts; @file{diff-mode.el}, a mode for viewing and editing context
diffs; @file{css-mode.el} for Cascading Style Sheets;
@file{bibtex-style.el} for Bib@TeX{} Style files; @file{mpc.el}, a
client for the ``Music Player Daemon''; @file{smie.el}, a generic
indentation engine; and @file{pcase.el}, implementing ML-style pattern
matching.  He integrated the lexical binding code in Emacs 24.

@item
Morioka Tomohiko wrote several packages for MIME support in Gnus and
elsewhere.

@item
Sen Nagata wrote @file{crm.el}, a package for reading multiple strings
with completion, and @file{rfc2368.el}, support for @code{mailto:}
URLs.

@item
Erik Naggum wrote the time-conversion functions.  He also wrote
@file{disp-table.el}, for dealing with display tables;
@file{mailheader.el}, for parsing email headers; and
@file{parse-time.el}, for parsing time strings.

@item
Takahashi Naoto co-wrote @file{quail.el} (q.v.@:), and wrote
@file{robin.el}, another input method.

@item
Thomas Neumann and Eric Raymond wrote @file{make-mode.el},
a mode for editing makefiles.

@item
Thien-Thi Nguyen and Dan Nicolaescu wrote @file{hideshow.el}, a minor
mode for selectively displaying blocks of text.

@item
Jurgen Nickelsen wrote @file{ws-mode.el}, providing WordStar emulation.

@item
Dan Nicolaescu added support for running Emacs as a daemon.  He also
wrote @file{romanian.el}, support for editing Romanian text;
@file{iris-ansi.el}, support for running Emacs on SGI's @code{xwsh}
and @code{winterm} terminal emulators; and @file{vc-dir.el}, displaying
the status of version-controlled directories.

@item
Hrvoje Niksic wrote @file{savehist.el}, for saving the minibuffer
history between Emacs sessions.

@item
Jeff Norden wrote @file{kermit.el}, a package to help the Kermit
dialup communications program run comfortably in an Emacs shell buffer.

@item
Andrew Norman wrote @file{ange-ftp.el}, providing transparent FTP
support.

@item
Kentaro Ohkouchi created the Emacs icons used beginning with Emacs 23.

@item
Christian Ohler wrote @file{ert.el}, a library for automated regression
testing.

@item
Alexandre Oliva wrote @file{gnus-mlspl.el}, a group params-based mail
splitting mechanism.

@item
Takaaki Ota wrote @file{table.el}, a package for creating and editing
embedded text-based tables.

@item
Pieter E.@: J.@: Pareit wrote @file{mixal-mode.el}, an editing mode for
the MIX assembly language.

@item
David Pearson wrote @file{quickurl.el}, a simple method of inserting a
URL into the current buffer based on text at point; @file{5x5.el}, a
game to fill all squares on the field.

@item
Jeff Peck wrote @file{sun.el}, key bindings for sunterm keys.

@item
Damon Anton Permezel wrote @file{hanoi.el}, an animated demonstration of
the ``Towers of Hanoi'' puzzle.

@item
William M.@: Perry wrote @file{mailcap.el} (with Lars Magne
Ingebrigtsen), a MIME media types configuration facility;
@file{mwheel.el}, a package for supporting mouse wheels; co-wrote (with
Dave Love) @file{socks.el}, a Socks v5 client; and developed the URL
package.

@item
Per Persson wrote @file{gnus-vm.el}, the VM interface for Gnus.

@item
Jens Petersen wrote @file{find-func.el}, which makes it easy to find
the source code for an Emacs Lisp function or variable.

@item
Daniel Pfeiffer wrote @file{conf-mode.el}, a mode for editing
configuration files; @file{copyright.el}, a package for updating
copyright notices in files; @file{executable.el}, a package for
executing interpreter scripts; @file{sh-script.el}, a mode for editing
shell scripts; @file{skeleton.el}, implementing a concise language for
writing statement skeletons; and @file{two-column.el}, a minor mode
for simultaneous two-column editing.

Daniel also rewrote @file{apropos.el} (originally written by Joe Wells),
for finding commands, functions, and variables matching a regular
expression; and, together with Jim Blandy, co-authored @file{wyse50.el},
support for Wyse 50 terminals.  He also co-wrote @file{compile.el}
(q.v.@:) and @file{ada-stmt.el}.

@item
Richard L.@: Pieri wrote @file{pop3.el}, a Post Office Protocol (RFC
1460) interface for Emacs.

@item
Fred Pierresteguy and Paul Reilly made Emacs work with X Toolkit
widgets.

@item
François Pinard, Greg McGary, and Bruno Haible wrote @file{po.el},
support for PO translation files.

@item
Christian Plaunt wrote @file{soundex.el}, an implementation of the
Soundex algorithm for comparing English words by their pronunciation.

@item
David Ponce wrote @file{recentf.el}, a package that puts a menu of
recently visited files in the Emacs menu bar; @file{ruler-mode.el}, a
minor mode for displaying a ruler in the header line; and
@file{tree-widget.el}, a package to display hierarchical data
structures.

@item
Francesco A.@: Potorti wrote @file{cmacexp.el}, providing a command which
runs the C preprocessor on a region of a file and displays the results.
He also expanded and redesigned the @code{etags} program.

@item
Michael D.@: Prange and Steven A.@: Wood wrote @file{fortran.el}, a mode
for editing Fortran code.

@item
Ashwin Ram wrote @file{refer.el}, commands to look up references in
bibliography files by keyword.

@item
Eric S.@: Raymond wrote @file{vc.el}, an interface to the RCS and SCCS
source code version control systems, with Paul Eggert; @file{gud.el},
a package for running source-level debuggers like GDB and SDB in
Emacs; @file{asm-mode.el}, a mode for editing assembly language code;
@file{AT386.el}, terminal support package for IBM's AT keyboards;
@file{cookie1.el}, support for ``fortune-cookie'' programs like
@file{yow.el} and @file{spook.el}; @file{finder.el}, a package for
finding Emacs Lisp packages by keyword and topic; @file{keyswap.el},
code to swap the @key{BS} and @key{DEL} keys; @file{loadhist.el},
functions for loading and unloading Emacs features;
@file{lisp-mnt.el}, functions for working with the special headers
used in Emacs Lisp library files; and code to set and make use of the
@code{load-history} lisp variable, which records the source file from
which each lisp function loaded into Emacs came.

@item
Edward M.@: Reingold wrote the calendar and diary support,
with contributions from Stewart Clamen (@file{cal-mayan.el}), Nachum
Dershowitz (@file{cal-hebrew.el}), Paul Eggert (@file{cal-dst.el}),
Steve Fisk (@file{cal-tex.el}), Michael Kifer (@file{cal-x.el}), Lara
Rios (@file{cal-menu.el}), and Denis B.@: Roegel (@file{solar.el}).
Andy Oram contributed to its documentation.  Reingold also contributed
to @file{tex-mode.el}, a mode for editing @TeX{} files, as did William
F.@: Schelter, Dick King, Stephen Gildea, Michael Prange, and Jacob
Gore.

@item
David Reitter wrote @file{mailclient.el} which can send mail via the
system's designated mail client.

@item
Alex Rezinsky wrote @file{which-func.el}, a mode that shows the name
of the current function in the mode line.

@item
Rob Riepel wrote @file{tpu-edt.el} and its associated files, providing
an emulation of the VMS TPU text editor emulating the VMS EDT editor,
and @file{vt-control.el}, providing some control functions for the DEC
VT line of terminals.

@item
Nick Roberts wrote @file{t-mouse.el}, for mouse support in text
terminals; and @file{gdb-ui.el}, a graphical user interface to GDB.
Together with Dmitry Dzhus, he wrote @file{gdb-mi.el}, the successor to
@file{gdb-ui.el}.

@item
Danny Roozendaal implemented @file{handwrite.el}, which converts text
into ``handwriting''.

@item
Markus Rost wrote @file{cus-test.el}, a testing framework for customize.

@item
Guillermo J.@: Rozas wrote @file{scheme.el}, a mode for editing Scheme and
DSSSL code.

@item
Martin Rudalics implemented improved display-buffer handling in Emacs 24.

@item
Ivar Rummelhoff wrote @file{winner.el}, which records recent window
configurations so you can move back to them.

@item
Jason Rumney ported the Emacs 21 display engine to MS-Windows, and has
contributed extensively to the MS-Windows port of Emacs.

@item
Wolfgang Rupprecht wrote Emacs 19's floating-point support (including
@file{float-sup.el} and @file{floatfns.c}), and @file{sup-mouse.el},
support for the Supdup mouse on lisp machines.

@item
Kevin Ryde wrote @file{info-xref.el}, a library for checking
references in Info files.

@item
James B.@: Salem and Brewster Kahle wrote @file{completion.el}, providing
dynamic word completion.

@item
Masahiko Sato wrote @file{vip.el}, an emulation of the VI editor.

@item
Holger Schauer wrote @file{fortune.el}, a package for using fortune in
message signatures.

@item
William Schelter wrote @file{telnet.el}, support for @code{telnet}
sessions within Emacs.

@item
Ralph Schleicher wrote @file{battery.el}, a package for displaying
laptop computer battery status, and @file{info-look.el}, a package for
looking up Info documentation for symbols in the buffer.

@item
Michael Schmidt and Tom Perrine wrote @file{modula2.el}, a mode for
editing Modula-2 code, based on work by Mick Jordan and Peter Robinson.

@item
Ronald S.@: Schnell wrote @file{dunnet.el}, a text adventure game.

@item
Philippe Schnoebelen wrote @file{gomoku.el}, a Go Moku game played
against Emacs; and @file{mpuz.el}, a multiplication puzzle.

@item
Rainer Schoepf contributed to Alpha and OSF1 support.

@item
Jan Schormann wrote @file{solitaire.el}, an implementation of the
Solitaire game.

@item
Alex Schroeder wrote @file{ansi-color.el}, a package for translating
ANSI color escape sequences to Emacs faces; @file{sql.el}, a package
for interactively running an SQL interpreter in an Emacs buffer;
@file{cus-theme.el}, an interface for custom themes; @file{master.el}, a
package for making a buffer @samp{master} over another; and
@file{spam-stat.el}, for statistical detection of junk email.  He also
wrote parts of the IRC client ERC (q.v.@:).

@item
Randal Schwartz wrote @file{pp.el}, a pretty-printer for lisp objects.

@item
Oliver Seidel wrote @file{todo-mode.el}, a package for maintaining
@file{TODO} list files.

@item
Manuel Serrano wrote the Flyspell package, which does spell checking
as you type.

@item
Hovav Shacham wrote @file{windmove.el}, a set of commands for selecting
windows based on their geometrical position on the frame.

@item
Stanislav Shalunov wrote @file{uce.el}, for responding to unsolicited
commercial email.

@item
Richard Sharman wrote @file{hilit-chg.el}, which uses colors to show
recent editing changes.

@item
Olin Shivers wrote @file{comint.el}, a library for modes running
interactive command-line-oriented subprocesses, and @file{shell.el}, for
running inferior shells (both since extended by Simon Marshall);
@file{cmuscheme.el}, for running inferior Scheme processes;
@file{inf-lisp.el}, for running inferior Lisp process.

@item
Espen Skoglund wrote @file{pascal.el}, a mode for editing Pascal code.

@item
Rick Sladkey wrote @file{backquote.el}, a lisp macro for creating
mostly-constant data.

@item
Lynn Slater wrote @file{help-macro.el}, a macro for writing interactive
help for key bindings.

@item
Chris Smith wrote @file{icon.el}, a mode for editing Icon code.

@item
David Smith wrote @file{ielm.el}, a mode for interacting with the Emacs
Lisp interpreter as a subprocess.

@item
Paul D.@: Smith wrote @file{snmp-mode.el}.

@item
William Sommerfeld wrote @file{scribe.el}, a mode for editing Scribe
files, and @file{server.el}, a package allowing programs to send files
to an extant Emacs job to be edited.

@item
Andre Spiegel made many contributions to the Emacs Version Control
package, and in particular made it support multiple back ends.

@item
Michael Staats wrote @file{pc-select.el}, which rebinds keys for
selecting regions to follow many other systems.

@item
Richard Stallman invented Emacs.  He is the original author of GNU
Emacs, and has been Emacs maintainer over several non-contiguous
periods.  In addition to much of the ``core'' Emacs code, he has
written @file{easymenu.el}, a facility for defining Emacs menus;
@file{image-mode.el}, support for visiting image files;
@file{menu-bar.el}, the Emacs menu bar support code;
@file{paren.el}, a package to make matching parentheses stand out in
color; and also co-authored portions of CC mode.

@item
Sam Steingold wrote @file{gulp.el}, a facility for asking package
maintainers for updated versions of their packages via e-mail, and
@file{midnight.el}, a package for running a command every midnight.

@item
Ake Stenhoff and Lars Lindberg wrote @file{imenu.el}, a framework for
browsing indices made from buffer contents.

@item
Peter Stephenson wrote @file{vcursor.el}, which implements a ``virtual
cursor'' that you can move with the keyboard and use for copying text.

@item
Ken Stevens wrote @file{ispell.el}, a spell-checker interface.

@item
Kim F.@: Storm made many improvements to the Emacs display engine,
process support, and networking support. He also wrote
@file{bindat.el}, a package for encoding and decoding binary data;
CUA mode, which allows Emacs to emulate the standard CUA key
bindings; @file{ido.el}, a package for selecting buffers and files
quickly; @file{keypad.el} for simplified keypad bindings; and
@file{kmacro.el}, the keyboard macro facility.

@item
Martin Stjernholm co-authored CC Mode, a major editing mode for C,
C@t{++}, Objective-C, Java, Pike, CORBA IDL, and AWK code.

@item
Steve Strassmann did not write @file{spook.el}, and even if he did, he
really didn't mean for you to use it in an anarchistic way.

@item
Olaf Sylvester wrote @file{bs.el}, a package for manipulating Emacs
buffers.

@item
Tibor @v{S}imko and Milan Zamazal wrote @file{slovak.el}, support for
editing text in Slovak language.

@item
Luc Teirlinck wrote @file{help-at-pt.el}, providing local help through
the keyboard.

@item
Jean-Philippe Theberge wrote @file{thumbs.el}, a package for viewing
image files as ``thumbnails''.

@item
Spencer Thomas wrote the original @file{dabbrev.el}, providing a command
which completes the partial word before point, based on other nearby
words for which it is a prefix.  He also wrote the original dumping
support.

@item
Toru Tomabechi contributed to Tibetan support.

@item
Markus Triska wrote @file{linum.el}, a minor mode that displays line
numbers in the left margin.

@item
Tom Tromey and Chris Lindblad wrote @file{tcl.el}, a mode for editing
Tcl/Tk source files and running a Tcl interpreter as an Emacs
subprocess.  Tom Tromey also wrote @file{bug-reference.el}, providing
clickable links to bug reports; and the first version of the Emacs
package system.

@item
Eli Tziperman wrote @file{rmail-spam-filter.el}, a spam filter for RMAIL.

@item
Daiki Ueno wrote @file{starttls.el}, support for Transport Layer
Security protocol; @file{sasl-cram.el} and @file{sasl-digest.el} (with
Kenichi Okada), and @file{sasl.el}, support for Simple Authentication
and Security Layer (SASL); @file{plstore.el} for secure storage of
property lists; and the EasyPG (and its predecessor PGG)
package, for GnuPG and PGP support.

@item
Masanobu Umeda wrote GNUS, a feature-rich reader for Usenet news that
was the ancestor of the current Gnus package.  He also wrote
@file{rmailsort.el}, a package for sorting messages in RMAIL folders;
@file{metamail.el}, an interface to the Metamail program;
@file{gnus-kill.el}, the Kill File mode for Gnus; @file{gnus-mh.el}, an
mh-e interface for Gnus; @file{gnus-msg.el}, a mail and post interface
for Gnus; and @file{timezone.el}, providing functions for dealing with
time zones.

@item
Neil W.@: Van Dyke wrote @file{webjump.el}, a ``hot links'' package.

@item
Didier Verna wrote @file{rect.el}, a package of functions for
operations on rectangle regions of text.  He also contributed to Gnus
(q.v.@:).

@item
Joakim Verona implemented ImageMagick support.

@item
Ulrik Vieth implemented @file{meta-mode.el}, for editing MetaFont code.

@item
Geoffrey Voelker wrote the Windows NT support.  He also wrote
@file{dos-w32.el}, functions shared by the MS-DOS and MS-Windows ports
of Emacs, and @file{w32-fns.el}, MS-Windows specific support functions.

@item
Johan Vromans wrote @file{forms.el} and its associated files, a mode for
filling in forms.  He also wrote @file{iso-acc.el}, a minor mode
providing electric accent keys.

@item
Colin Walters wrote Ibuffer, an enhanced buffer menu.

@item
Barry Warsaw wrote @file{assoc.el}, a set of utility functions for
working with association lists; @file{cc-mode.el}, a mode for editing
C, C@t{++}, and Java code, based on earlier work by Dave Detlefs,
Stewart Clamen, and Richard Stallman; @file{elp.el}, a profiler for
Emacs Lisp programs; @file{man.el}, a mode for reading Unix manual
pages; @file{regi.el}, providing an AWK-like functionality for use in
lisp programs; @file{reporter.el}, providing customizable bug
reporting for lisp packages; and @file{supercite.el}, a minor mode for
quoting sections of mail messages and news articles.

@item
Christoph Wedler wrote @file{antlr-mode.el}, a major mode for ANTLR
grammar files.

@item
Morten Welinder helped port Emacs to MS-DOS, and introduced face
support into the MS-DOS port of Emacs.  He also wrote
@file{desktop.el}, facilities for saving some of Emacs's state between
sessions; @file{timer.el}, the Emacs facility to run commands at a
given time or frequency, or when Emacs is idle, and its C-level
support code; @file{pc-win.el}, the MS-DOS ``window-system'' support;
@file{internal.el}, an ``internal terminal'' emulator for the MS-DOS
port of Emacs; @file{arc-mode.el}, the mode for editing compressed
archives; @file{s-region.el}, commands for setting the region using
the shift key and motion commands; and @file{dos-fns.el}, functions
for use under MS-DOS.

@item
Joe Wells wrote the original version of @file{apropos.el} (q.v.@:);
@file{resume.el}, support for processing command-line arguments after
resuming a suspended Emacs job; and @file{mail-extr.el}, a package for
extracting names and addresses from mail headers, with contributions
from Jamie Zawinski.

@item
Rodney Whitby and Reto Zimmermann wrote @file{vhdl-mode.el}, a major
mode for editing VHDL source code.

@item
John Wiegley wrote @file{align.el}, a set of commands for aligning text
according to regular-expression based rules; @file{isearchb.el} for fast
buffer switching; @file{timeclock.el}, a package for keeping track of
time spent on projects; the Bahá'í calendar support;
@file{pcomplete.el}, a programmable completion facility;
@file{remember.el}, a mode for jotting down things to remember;
@file{eudcb-mab.el}, an address book backend for the Emacs Unified
Directory Client; and @code{eshell}, a command shell implemented
entirely in Emacs Lisp.  He also contributed to Org mode (q.v.@:).

@item
Mike Williams wrote @file{mouse-sel.el}, providing enhanced mouse
selection; and @file{thingatpt.el}, a library of functions for finding
the ``thing'' (word, line, s-expression) containing point.

@item
Roland Winkler wrote @file{proced.el}, a system process editor.

@item
Bill Wohler wrote MH-E, the Emacs interface to the MH mail system;
making use of earlier work by James R.@: Larus.  Satyaki Das, Peter S.@:
Galbraith, Stephen Gildea, and Jeffrey C.@: Honig also wrote various
MH-E components.

@item
Dale R.@: Worley wrote @file{emerge.el}, a package for interactively
merging two versions of a file.

@item
Francis J.@: Wright wrote @file{woman.el}, a package for browsing
manual pages without the @code{man} command.

@item
Masatake Yamato wrote @file{ld-script.el}, an editing mode for GNU
linker scripts, and contributed subword handling and style
``guessing'' in CC mode.

@item
Jonathan Yavner wrote @file{testcover.el}, a package for keeping track
of the testing status of Emacs Lisp code; @file{unsafep.el} to determine
if a Lisp form is safe; and the SES spreadsheet package.

@item
Ryan Yeske wrote @file{rcirc.el} a simple Internet Relay Chat client.

@item
Ilya Zakharevich and Bob Olson wrote @file{cperl-mode.el}, a major
mode for editing Perl code.  Ilya Zakharevich also wrote
@file{tmm.el}, a mode for accessing the Emacs menu bar on a text-mode
terminal.

@item
Milan Zamazal wrote @file{czech.el}, support for editing Czech text;
@file{glasses.el}, a package for easier reading of source code that
uses illegible identifier names; and @file{tildify.el}, commands for
adding hard spaces to text, @TeX{}, and SGML/HTML files.

@item
Victor Zandy wrote @file{zone.el}, a package for people who like to
zone out in front of Emacs.

@item
Eli Zaretskii made many standard Emacs features work on MS-DOS and
Microsoft Windows.  He also wrote @file{tty-colors.el}, which
implements transparent mapping of X colors to tty colors; and
@file{rxvt.el}.  He implemented support for bidirectional text.

@item
Jamie Zawinski wrote much of the support for faces and X selections.
With Hallvard Furuseth, he wrote the optimizing byte compiler used
from Emacs 19 onwards.  He also wrote @file{mailabbrev.el}, a package
that provides automatic expansion of mail aliases, and
@file{tar-mode.el}, which provides simple viewing and editing commands
for tar files.

@item
Andrew Zhilin created the Emacs 22 icons.

@item
Shenghuo Zhu wrote @file{binhex.el}, a package for reading and writing
binhex files; @file{mm-partial.el}, message/partial support for MIME
messages; @file{rfc1843.el}, an HZ decoding package;
@file{uudecode.el}, an Emacs Lisp decoder for uuencoded data; and
@file{webmail.el}, an interface to Web mail.  He also wrote several
other Gnus components.

@item
Ian T.@: Zimmerman wrote @file{gametree.el}.

@item
Reto Zimmermann wrote @file{vera-mode.el}.

@item
Neal Ziring and Felix S.@: T.@: Wu wrote @file{vi.el}, an emulation of the
VI text editor.

@item
Ted Zlatanov (as well as his contributions to the Gnus newsreader)
wrote an interface to the GnuTLS library, for secure network
connections; and a futures facility for the URL library.

@item
Detlev Zundel wrote @file{re-builder.el}, a package for building regexps
with visual feedback.

@end itemize
