\input texinfo    @c -*-texinfo-*-
@comment %**start of header
@setfilename ../../info/emacs-xtra
@settitle Specialized Emacs Features
@c Merge all functions, variables, and keys into the concept index.
@syncodeindex fn cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex ky cp
@comment %**end of header

@copying
This manual describes specialized features of Emacs.

Copyright @copyright{} 2004-2012 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover texts being ``A GNU
Manual,'' and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the
license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License'' in the Emacs manual.

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have the freedom to copy and
modify this GNU manual.  Buying copies from the FSF supports it in
developing GNU and promoting software freedom.''

This document is part of a collection distributed under the GNU Free
Documentation License.  If you want to distribute this document
separately from the collection, you can do so by adding a copy of the
license to the document, as described in section 6 of the license.
@end quotation
@end copying

@documentencoding ISO-8859-1

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Emacs-Xtra: (emacs-xtra).    Specialized Emacs features.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title Specialized Emacs Features
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Specialized Emacs Features

@insertcopying

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::        What documentation belongs here?
@iftex
* Picture Mode::        Editing pictures made up of characters using 
                         the quarter-plane screen model.

* Autorevert::          Auto Reverting non-file buffers.
* Subdir Switches::     Subdirectory switches in Dired.
* Advanced Calendar/Diary Usage:: Advanced Calendar/Diary customization.
* Emerge::              A convenient way of merging two versions of a program.
* Advanced VC Usage::   Advanced VC (version control) features.
* Fortran::             Fortran mode and its special features.
* MS-DOS::              Using Emacs on MS-DOS.
@end iftex
* Index::
@end menu

@node Introduction
@unnumbered Introduction

This manual contains detailed information about various features that
are too specialized to be included in the printed Emacs manual.  It is
intended to be readable by anyone having a basic knowledge of Emacs.
However, certain sections may be intended for a more specialized
audience, such as Elisp authors.  This should be clearly pointed out
at the beginning of these sections.

@c Note to authors - you need to be careful about cross-references to
@c topics in the Emacs manual.  As a printed document, the xtra files
@c are separate from the Emacs manual; but as an info document, they
@c are part of the Emacs manual.  Hence you need to use something like:
@c @iftex
@c @ref{Comparing Files,,, emacs, the Emacs Manual},
@c @end iftex
@c @ifnottex
@c @ref{Comparing Files},
@c @end ifnottex

Certain packages (or collections of related features) have their own
manuals, separate from the main Emacs manual.  This manual is
intended as a complement, rather than an alternative, to reading those
additional manuals.  In a nutshell, it is a collection of smaller
specialized features (or extra detail about standard features), too
small or too obscure to justify their own manual, or inclusion in the
printed Emacs manual.  The chapters in this manual are, however,
included (at the relevant places) in the main Emacs manual when it is
formatted as an Info document.

Sections intended specifically for Elisp programmers can follow the
style of the Elisp manual.  Other sections should follow the style of
the Emacs manual.

@iftex

@raisesections
@include picture-xtra.texi

@include arevert-xtra.texi

@include dired-xtra.texi

@include cal-xtra.texi

@include emerge-xtra.texi

@include vc-xtra.texi

@include fortran-xtra.texi

@include msdog-xtra.texi

@lowersections
@end iftex

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
